R. Panneerselvam
Engineering
Economics
Engineering Economics
Professor
School of Management
Pondicherry University
by R. Panneerselvam
© 2001 by PHI Learning Private Limited, New Delhi. All rights reserved. No part
of this book may be reproduced in any form, by mimeograph or any other means,
without permission in writing from the publisher.
The export rights of this book are vested solely with the publisher.
Thirteenth Printing
Published by Asoke K. Ghosh, PHI Learning Private Limited, M-97, Connaught
Circus, New Delhi-110001 and Printed by Meenakshi Art Printers, Delhi-110006.
To
My Great-Grand-father
v
Preface
ix
1.1.1 Flow in an Economy
1.1.2 Law of Supply and Demand
1.2 Concept of Engineering Economics
1.2.1 Types of Efficiency
1.2.2 Definition and Scope of Engineering Economics
1.3 Elements of Costs
1.6 Profit/Volume Ratio (P/V Ratio)
Questions
2.2 Examples for Simple Economic Analysis
2.2.1 Material Selection for a Product/Substitution
of Raw Material
2.2.2 Design Selection for a Product
2.2.3 Building Material Selection
2.2.4 Process Planning/Process Modification
3. INTEREST FORMULAS AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
3.2 Time Value of Money
3.3.1 Single-Payment Compound Amount
3.3.2 Single-Payment Present Worth Amount
3.3.3 Equal-Payment Series Compound Amount
3.3.4 Equal-Payment Series Sinking Fund 31
vi
Contents
3.3.5 Equal-Payment Series Present Worth Amount
3.3.6 Equal-Payment Series Capital Recovery Amount
3.3.7 Uniform Gradient Series Annual Equivalent Amount
3.3.8 Effective Interest Rate
3.4 Bases for Comparison of Alternatives
PRESENT WORTH METHOD OF COMPARISON
4.2 Revenue-dominated Cash Flow Diagram
4.3 Cost-dominated Cash Flow Diagram
5.2 Revenue-dominated Cash Flow Diagram
5.3 Cost-dominated Cash Flow Diagram
6.2 Revenue-dominated Cash Flow Diagram
6.3 Cost-dominated Cash Flow Diagram
RATE OF RETURN METHOD
REPLACEMENT AND MAINTENANCE ANALYSIS
8.2 Types of Maintenance
8.3 Types of Replacement Problem
8.4 Determination of Economic Life of an Asset
8.5 Replacement of Existing Asset with a New Asset
8.5.1 Capital Recovery with Return
8.5.2 Concept of Challenger and Defender
8.6 Simple Probabilistic Model for Items Which Fail Completely
vii
9.2 Methods of Depreciation
9.2.1 Straight Line Method of Depreciation
9.2.2 Declining Balance Method of Depreciation
9.2.3 Sum-of-the-Years-Digits Method of Depreciation
9.2.4 Sinking Fund Method of Depreciation
9.2.5 Service Output Method of Depreciation
10. EVALUATION OF PUBLIC ALTERNATIVES
11. INFLATION ADJUSTED DECISIONS
11.2 Procedure to Adjust Inflation
11.3 Inflation Adjusted Economic Life of Machine
11.3.1 Limitation of Existing Model
11.3.2 Economic Life Determination without Inflationary Effect
11.3.3 Economic Life Determination with Inflationary Effect
12.2 Purchase Model with Instantaneous Replenishment and without
Shortages
12.3 Manufacturing Model without Shortages
12.4 Purchase Model with Shortages (Instantaneous Supply)
12.5 Manufacturing Model with Shortages
13. MAKE OR BUY DECISION
13.2 Criteria for Make or Buy
13.3 Approaches for Make or Buy Decision
13.3.1 Simple Cost Analysis
14.2 Phases of Project Management
viii
14.3 Guidelines for Network Construction
14.4 Critical Path Method (CPM)
14.5 Gantt Chart/Time Chart
14.6 PERT (Project Evaluation and Review Technique)
15. VALUE ANALYSIS/VALUE ENGINEERING
15.2 When to Apply Value Analysis
15.2.1 Value Analysis vs. Value Engineering
15.5 Value Engineering Procedure
15.7 Advantages and Application Areas
16.2 Development of LP Models
Efficient functioning of any business organization would enable it to provide
goods/services at a lower price. In the process of managing organizations, the
managers at different levels should take appropriate economic decisions which
will help in minimizing investment, operating and maintenance expenditures
besides increasing the revenue, savings and such other gains of the organization.
These can be achieved through Engineering Economics which deals with the
methods that enable one to make economic decisions towards minimizing costs
and/or maximizing benefits to business organizations.
This book on Engineering Economics is the outgrowth of my several years
of teaching postgraduate courses in industrial engineering and production
engineering and a year of teaching water resources management (all at Anna
University, Chennai). It is intended as a text for these disciplines. It can also be
used as a text for the undergraduate engineering courses and as a reference for
management (project management) and commerce (financial management)
courses. Besides, professional engineers and project consultants undertaking
economic decision analysis would find the book useful.
I have tried not only to give a comprehensive coverage of the various
aspects of engineering economic analysis but provided an exhaustive appendix
on Interest Tables for a wide range of interest rates (0.25 –50%) and a period
ranging from one year to 100 years. These tables, along with the topics
discussed, will, I believe, help both students and teachers in carrying out
economic analysis and solving problems.
The book contains about 100 well-structured worked-out examples to
illustrate the concepts explained. Each chapter also has a set of questions and
problems to test the student’s power of comprehending the topics.
I wish to thank Prof. Dr. K. N. Balasubramanian, formerly Head of the
Department of Industrial Engineering Division of Anna University, who gave me
the opportunity of teaching the subject to M. E. Industrial Engineering class
continuously for seven years during my stay there as a faculty. This enabled me
to enrich my knowledge and expertise in the subject. Many of my colleagues
and academic friends helped me by giving valuable suggestions on the structure
and content of this text and these were instrumental in improving the quality and
presentation of this book. I wish to express my profound gratitude and
appreciation to all of them.
Any suggestions for improving the contents would be warmly appreciated.
This chapter discusses the elements of economics and the interaction between
its various components. This is followed by an analysis of the need and scope
of engineering economics. Later, elements of cost and break-even analysis are
presented.
Economics is the science that deals with the production and consumption of
goods and services and the distribution and rendering of these for human
welfare.
The following are the economic goals.
 A high level of employment
 Price stability
 Efficiency
 An equitable distribution of income
 Growth
Some of the above goals are interdependent. The economic goals are not always
complementary; in many cases they are in conflict. For example, any move to
have a significant reduction in unemployment will lead to an increase in
inflation.
Flow in an Economy
The flow of goods, services, resources and money payments in a simple
economy are shown in Fig. 1.1. Households and businesses are the two major
entities in a simple economy. Business organizations use various economic
resources like land, labour and capital which are provided by households
to produce consumer goods and services which will be used by them.
Business organizations make payment of money to the households for
receiving various resources. The households in turn make payment of
money to business organizations for receiving consumer goods and services.
This cycle shows the interdependence between the two major entities in a
simple economy.
Law of Supply and Demand
An interesting aspect of the economy is that the demand and supply of a product
are interdependent and they are sensitive with respect to the price of that
product. The interrelationships between them are shown in Fig. 1.2.
From Fig. 1.2 it is clear that when there is a decrease in the price of a
product, the demand for the product increases and its supply decreases. Also, the
product is more in demand and hence the demand of the product increases. At
the same time, lowering of the price of the product makes the producers restrain
from releasing more quantities of the product in the market. Hence, the supply
of the product is decreased. The point of intersection of the supply curve and
the demand curve is known as the equilibrium point. At the price corresponding
to this point, the quantity of supply is equal to the quantity of demand. Hence,
this point is called the equilibrium point.
Factors influencing demand
The shape of the demand curve is influenced by the following factors:
 Income of the people
 Prices of related goods
 Tastes of consumers
If the income level of the people increases significantly, then their
purchasing power will naturally improve. This would definitely shift the demand
curve to the north-east direction of Fig. 1.2. A converse situation will shift the
demand curve to the south-west direction.
If, for instance, the price of television sets is lowered drastically its demand
would naturally go up. As a result, the demand for its associated product,
Flow of goods, services, resources and money payments in a simple economy.
Economic Resources: Land, labour, capital
Money payments for consumer goods and services
Consumer goods, services
1. Consume final goods
and services produced by
businesses and services
2. Provide productive inputs
to businesses
Households
Businesses
1. Provide goods and
services to consumers
2. Use resources, inputs
provided by households
Money payments for resources, rents, wages,
salaries, interest and profit
Introduction
namely VCDs would also increase. Hence, the prices of related goods influences
the demand of a product.
Over a period of time, the preference of the people for a particular product
may increase, which in turn, will affect its demand. For instance, diabetic people
prefer to have sugar-free products. If the incidence of diabetes rises naturally
there will be increased demand for sugar-free products.
Factors influencing supply
The shape of the supply curve is affected by the following factors:
 Cost of the inputs
 Technology
 Weather
If the cost of inputs increases, then naturally, the cost of the product will go up.
In such a situation, at the prevailing price of the product the profit margin per
unit will be less. The producers will then reduce the production quantity, which
in turn will affect the supply of the product. For instance, if the prices of
fertilizers and cost of labour are increased significantly, in agriculture, the profit
margin per bag of paddy will be reduced. So, the farmers will reduce the area
of cultivation, and hence the quantity of supply of paddy will be reduced at the
prevailing prices of the paddy.
If there is an advancement in technology used in the manufacture of the
product in the long run, there will be a reduction in the production cost per unit.
This will enable the manufacturer to have a greater profit margin per unit at the
prevailing price of the product. Hence, the producer will be tempted to supply
more quantity to the market.
Weather also has a direct bearing on the supply of products. For example,
demand for woollen products will increase during winter. This means the prices
of woollen goods will be incresed in winter. So, naturally, manufacturers will
supply more volume of woollen goods during winter.
Demand
Supply
Price
Quantity
Demand and supply curve.
Again, take the case of television sets. If the price of TV sets is lowered
significantly, then its demand would naturally go up. As a result, the demand for
associated products like VCDs would also go up. Over a period of time, this will
lead to an increase in the price of VCDs, which would result in more supply of
VCDs.
CONCEPT OF ENGINEERING ECONOMICS
Science is a field of study where the basic principles of different physical
systems are formulated and tested. Engineering is the application of science.
It establishes varied application systems based on different scientific principles.
From the discussions in the previous section, it is clear that price has a
major role in deciding the demand and supply of a product. Hence, from the
organization’s point of view, efficient and effective functioning of the
organization would certainly help it to provide goods/services at a lower cost
which in turn will enable it to fix a lower price for its goods or services.
The following section discusses the different types of efficiency and their
impact on the operation of businesses and the definition and scope of
engineering economics.
Types of Efficiency
Efficiency of a system is generally defined as the ratio of its output to input. The
efficiency can be classified into technical efficiency and economic efficiency.
Technical efficiency
It is the ratio of the output to input of a physical system. The physical system
may be a diesel engine, a machine working in a shop floor, a furnace, etc.
Technical efficiency (%) = Output
The technical efficiency of a diesel engine is as follows:
Technical efficiency (%) =
Heat equivalent of mechanical
energy produced
Heat equivalent of fuel used 100
In practice, technical efficiency can never be more than 100%. This is mainly
due to frictional loss and incomplete combustion of fuel, which are considered
to be unavoidable phenomena in the working of a diesel engine.
Economic efficiency
Economic efficiency is the ratio of output to input of a business system.
Economic efficiency (%) = Output
Input 100 = Worth
‘Worth’ is the annual revenue generated by way of operating the business
and ‘cost’ is the total annual expenses incurred in carrying out the business. For
the survival and growth of any business, the economic efficiency should be more
Economic efficiency is also called ‘productivity’. There are several ways of
improving productivity.
 Increased output for the same input
 Decreased input for the same output
 By a proportionate increase in the output which is more than the
proportionate increase in the input
 By a proportionate decrease in the input which is more than the
proportionate decrease in the output
 Through simultaneous increase in the output with decrease in the input.
Increased output for the same input.
In this strategy, the output is increased
while keeping the input constant. Let us assume that in a steel plant, the layout
of the existing facilities is not proper. By slightly altering the location of the
billet-making section, and bringing it closer to the furnace which produces hot
metal, the scale formation at the top of ladles will be considerably reduced. The
molten metal is usually carried in ladles to the billet-making section. In the long
run, this would give more yield in terms of tonnes of billet produced. In this
exercise, there is no extra cost involved. The only task is the relocation of the
billet-making facility which involves an insignificant cost.
Decreased input for the same output.
In this strategy, the input is decreased to
produce the same output. Let us assume that there exists a substitute raw
material to manufacture a product and it is available at a lower price. If we can
identify such a material and use it for manufacturing the product, then certainly
it will reduce the input. In this exercise, the job of the purchase department is
to identify an alternate substitute material. The process of identification does not
involve any extra cost. So, the productivity ratio will increase because of the
decreased input by way of using cheaper raw materials to produce the same
output.
Less proportionate increase in output is more than that of the input.
Consider
the example of introducing a new product into the existing product mix of an
organization. Let us assume that the existing facilities are not fully utilized and
the R&D wing of the company has identified a new product which has a very
good market and which can be manufactured with the surplus facilities of the
organization. If the new product is taken up for production, it will lead to—
 an increase in the revenue of the organization by way of selling the new
product in addition to the existing product mix and
 an increase in the material cost and operation and maintenance cost of
machineries because of producing the new product.
If we examine these two increases closely, the proportionate increase in the
revenue will be more than the proportionate increase in the input cost. Hence,
there will be a net increase in the productivity ratio.
When proportionate decrease in input is more than that of the output.
Let us
consider the converse of the previous example, i. e. dropping an uneconomical
product from the existing product mix. This will result in the following:
 A decrease in the revenue of the organization
 A decrease in the material cost, and operation and maintenance cost of
machinery
If we closely examine these two decreases, we will see that the proportionate
decrease in the input cost will be more than the proportionate decrease in the
revenue. Hence, there will be a net increase in the productivity ratio.
Simultaneous increase in output and decrease in input.
Let us assume that
there are advanced automated technologies like robots and automated guided
vehicle system (AGVS), available in the market which can be employed in the
organization we are interested in. If we employ these modern tools, then:
 There will be a drastic reduction in the operation cost. Initially, the cost
on equipment would be very high. But, in the long run, the reduction in
the operation cost would break-even the high initial investment and offer
more savings on the input.
 These advanced facilities would help in producing more products because
they do not experience fatigue. The increased production will yield more
revenue.
In this example, in the long run, there is an increase in the revenue and a
decrease in the input. Hence, the productivity ratio will increase at a faster rate.
Definition and Scope of Engineering Economics
As stated earlier, efficient functioning of any business organization would enable
it to provide goods/services at a lower price. In the process of managing
organizations, the managers at different levels should take appropriate economic
decisions which will help in minimizing investment, operating and maintenance
expenditures besides increasing the revenue, savings and other related gains of
the organization.
Definition
Engineering economics deals with the methods that enable one to take economic
decisions towards minimizing costs and/or maximizing benefits to business
organizations.
The
Scope
The issues that are covered in this book are elementary economic analysis,
interest formulae, bases for comparing alternatives, present worth method,
future worth method, annual equivalent method, rate of return method,
replacement analysis, depreciation, evaluation of public alternatives, inflation
adjusted investment decisions, make or buy decisions, inventory control, project
management, value engineering, and linear programming.
Cost can be broadly classified into variable cost and overhead cost. Variable
cost varies with the volume of production while overhead cost is fixed,
irrespective of the production volume.
Variable cost can be further classified into direct material cost, direct labour
cost, and direct expenses. The overhead cost can be classified into factory
overhead, administration overhead, selling overhead, and distribution
overhead.
Direct material costs are those costs of materials that are used to produce
the product. Direct labour cost is the amount of wages paid to the direct labour
involved in the production activities. Direct expenses are those expenses that
vary in relation to the production volume, other than the direct material costs
and direct labour costs.
Overhead cost is the aggregate of indirect material costs, indirect labour
costs and indirect expenses. Administration overhead includes all the costs that
are incurred in administering the business. Selling overhead is the total expense
that is incurred in the promotional activities and the expenses relating to sales
force. Distribution overhead is the total cost of shipping the items from the
factory site to the customer sites.
The selling price of a product is derived as shown below:
(a) Direct material costs + Direct labour costs + Direct expenses = Prime
cost
(b) Prime cost + Factory overhead = Factory cost
(c) Factory cost + Office and administrative overhead = Costs of
production
(d) Cost of production + Opening finished stock – Closing finished stock
= Cost of goods sold
(e) Cost of goods sold + Selling and distribution overhead = Cost of sales
(f) Cost of sales + Profit = Sales
(g) Sales/Quantity sold = Selling price per unit
In the above calculations, if the opening finished stock is equal to the closing
finished stock, then the cost of production is equal to the cost of goods sold.
The following are the costs/revenues other than the costs which are presented in
the previous section:
 Marginal cost
 Marginal revenue
 Sunk cost
 Opportunity cost
Marginal Cost
Marginal cost of a product is the cost of producing an additional unit of that
product. Let the cost of producing 20 units of a product be Rs. 10,000, and the
cost of producing 21 units of the same product be Rs. 10,045. Then the marginal
cost of producing the 21 st unit is Rs. 45.
Marginal Revenue
Marginal revenue of a product is the incremental revenue of selling an additional
unit of that product. Let, the revenue of selling 20 units of a product be
Rs. 15,000 and the revenue of selling 21 units of the same product be
Rs. 15,085. Then, the marginal revenue of selling the 21 st unit is Rs. 85.
Sunk Cost
This is known as the past cost of an equipment/asset. Let us assume that an
equipment has been purchased for Rs. 1,00,000 about three years back. If it is
considered for replacement, then its present value is not Rs. 1,00,000. Instead,
its present market value should be taken as the present value of the equipment
for further analysis. So, the purchase value of the equipment in the past is
known as its sunk cost. The sunk cost should not be considered for any analysis
done from nowonwards.
Opportunity Cost
In practice, if an alternative (X) is selected from a set of competing alternatives
(X,Y), then the corresponding investment in the selected alternative is not
available for any other purpose. If the same money is invested in some other
alternative (Y), it may fetch some return. Since the money is invested in the
selected alternative (X), one has to forego the return from the other alternative
(Y). The amount that is foregone by not investing in the other alternative (Y) is
known as the opportunity cost of the selected alternative (X). So the opportunity
cost of an alternative is the return that will be foregone by not investing the same
money in another alternative.
Consider that a person has invested a sum of Rs. 50,000 in shares. Let the
expected annual return by this alternative be Rs. 7,500. If the same amount is
invested in a fixed deposit, a bank will pay a return of 18%. Then, the
corresponding total return per year for the investment in the bank is Rs. 9,000.
This return is greater than the return from shares. The foregone excess return of
Rs. 1,500 by way of not investing in the bank is the opportunity cost of investing
in shares.
The main objective of break-even analysis is to find the cut-off production
volume from where a firm will make profit. Let
s = selling price per unit
v = variable cost per unit
FC = fixed cost per period
Q = volume of production
The total sales revenue (S) of the firm is given by the following formula:
S = s  Q
The total cost of the firm for a given production volume is given as
TC = Total variable cost + Fixed cost
= v  Q + FC
The linear plots of the above two equations are shown in Fig. 1.3. The
intersection point of the total sales revenue line and the total cost line is called
Break-even chart.
Production quantity
Fixed cost (FC)
Variable cost (VC)
Total cost (TC)
Sales (S)
Profit
Loss
Break-even
sales
the break-even point. The corresponding volume of production on the X-axis is
known as the break-even sales quantity. At the intersection point, the total cost
is equal to the total revenue. This point is also called the no-loss or no-gain
situation. For any production quantity which is less than the break-even quantity,
the total cost is more than the total revenue. Hence, the firm will be making loss.
For any production quantity which is more than the break-even quantity, the
total revenue will be more than the total cost. Hence, the firm will be making
profit.
Profit = Sales – (Fixed cost + Variable costs)
= s  Q – (FC + v  Q)
The formulae to find the break-even quantity and break-even sales quantity
Break-even quantity =
Fixed cost
Selling price/unit Variable cost/unit
(in units)
s v
Break-even sales =
Selling price/unit Variable cost/unit Selling price/unit
s
The contribution is the difference between the sales and the variable costs. The
margin of safety (M. S.) is the sales over and above the break-even sales. The
formulae to compute these values are
Contribution = Sales – Variable costs
Contribution/unit = Selling price/unit – Variable cost/unit
M. S. = Actual sales – Break-even sales
Contribution sales
M. S. as a per cent of sales = (M. S./Sales) 100
Alpha Associates has the following details:
Fixed cost = Rs. 20,00,000
Variable cost per unit = Rs. 100
Selling price per unit = Rs. 200
Find
(a) The break-even sales quantity,
(b) The break-even sales
(c) If the actual production quantity is 60,000, find (i) contribution; and
(ii) margin of safety by all methods.
Solution
Fixed cost (FC) = Rs. 20,00,000
Variable cost per unit (v) = Rs. 100
Selling price per unit (s) = Rs. 200
(a) Break-even quantity =
= 20,00,000/100 = 20,000 units
(b) Break-even sales = FC
 200 = Rs. 40,00,000
(i) Contribution = Sales – Variable cost
= s  Q – v  Q
= 200  60,000 – 100  60,000
= 1,20,00,000 – 60,00,000
(ii) Margin of safety
M. S. = Sales – Break-even sales
= 60,000  200 – 40,00,000
= 1,20,00,000 – 40,00,000 = Rs. 80,00,000
Contribution  Sales
Profit = Sales – (FC + v  Q)
= 60,000  200 – (20,00,000 + 100  60,000)
= 1,20,00,000 – 80,00,000
60,00,000  1,20,00,000 = Rs. 80,00,000
M. S. as a per cent of sales = 80,00,000
1,20,00,000  100 = 67%
PROFIT/VOLUME RATIO (P/V RATIO)
P/V ratio is a valid ratio which is useful for further analysis. The different
formulae for the P/V ratio are as follows:
P/V ratio = Contribution
= Sales Variable costs
The relationship between BEP and P/V ratio is as follows:
BEP = Fixed cost
/ ratio
The following formula helps us find the M. S. using the P/V ratio:
Consider the following data of a company for the year 1997:
Sales = Rs. 1,20,000
Fixed cost = Rs. 25,000
Variable cost = Rs. 45,000
Find the following:
(a) Contribution
(b) Profit
(c) BEP
(a) Contribution = Sales – Variable costs
= Rs. 1,20,000 – Rs. 45,000
(b) Profit = Contribution – Fixed cost
= Rs. 75,000 – Rs. 25,000
1,20,000  100 = 62.50%
 100 = Rs. 40,000
ratio
 100 = Rs. 80,000
Consider the following data of a company for the year 1998:
Sales = Rs. 80,000
Fixed cost = Rs. 15,000
Variable cost = 35,000
= Rs. 80,000 – Rs. 35,000
= Rs. 45,000 – Rs. 15,000
80,000  100 = 56.25%
 100 = Rs. 26,667
 100 = Rs. 53,333.33
1. Define economics. Also discuss the flow of goods, services, resources and
money payments in a simple economy with the help of a suitable diagram.
2. Illustrate the effect of price on demand and supply; illustrate with the help
of a diagram.
3. Discuss the factors which influence demand and supply.
4. Distinguish between technical efficiency and economic efficiency by giving
examples.
5. What are the ways by which the economic efficiency can be improved?
6. Give the definition and scope of engineering economics.
7. Clearly explain the method of deriving the selling price of a product.
8. Define the following costs with examples:
(a) Sunk cost
(b) Opportunity cost
(c) Marginal cost
(d) Marginal revenue.
9. Define break-even point. Draw a break-even chart and explain its
components.
10. Krishna Company Ltd. has the following details:
Fixed cost = Rs. 40,00,000
Variable cost per unit = Rs. 300
Selling price per unit = Rs. 500
(a) The break-even sales quantity
(c) If the actual production quantity is 1,20,000, find the following:
(i) Contribution
(ii) Margin of safety by all methods
11. Consider the following data of a company for the year 1998.
Sales = Rs. 2,40,000
Fixed cost = Rs. 50,000
Variable cost = Rs. 75,000
(d) Margin of safety
Whether it is a business situation or a day-to-day event in somebody’s personal
life, there are a large number of economic decision making involved. One can
manage many of these decision problems by using simple economic analysis.
For example, an industry can source its raw materials from a nearby place or
from a far-off place. In this problem, the following factors will affect the
decision:
 Price of the raw material
 Transportation cost of the raw material
 Availability of the raw material
 Quality of the raw material
Consider the alternative of sourcing raw materials from a nearby place with
the following characteristics:
 The raw material is more costly in the nearby area.
 The availability of the raw material is not sufficient enough to support
the operation of the industry throughout the year.
 The raw material requires pre-processing before it is used in the
production process. This would certainly add cost to the product.
 The cost of transportation is minimal under this alternative.
On the other hand, consider another alternative of sourcing the raw
materials from a far-off place with the following characteristics:
 The raw material is less costly at the far off place.
 The cost of transportation is very high.
 The availability of the raw material at this site is abundant and it can
support the plant throughout the year.
 The raw material from this site does not require any pre-processing
before using it for production.
Under such a situation, the procurement of the raw material should be
decided in such a way that the overall cost is minimized.
The above example clearly highlights the various components of cost that
are involved in each of the alternatives of the decision-making process as well
as a method of taking a suitable decision.
EXAMPLES FOR SIMPLE ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
In this section, the concept of simple economic analysis is illustrated using
suitable examples in the following areas:
 Material selection for a product
 Design selection for a product
 Design selection for a process industry
 Building material selection for construction activities
 Process planning/Process modification
Material Selection for a Product/Substitution of Raw
Material
The cost of a product can be reduced greatly by substitution of the raw
materials. Among various elements of cost, raw material cost is most significant
and it forms a major portion of the total cost of any product. So, any attempt
to find a suitable raw material will bring a reduction in the total cost in any one
or combinations of the following ways:
 Cheaper raw material price
 Reduced machining/process time
 Enhanced durability of the product
Therefore, the process of raw material selection/substitution will result in
finding an alternate raw material which will provide the necessary functions that
are provided by the raw material that is presently used. In this process, if the
new raw material provides any additional benefit, then it should be treated as its
welcoming feature. This concept is demonstrated with two numerical problems.
In the design of a jet engine part, the designer has a choice of
specifying either an aluminium alloy casting or a steel casting. Either material
will provide equal service, but the aluminium casting will weigh 1.2 kg as
compared with 1.35 kg for the steel casting.
The aluminium can be cast for Rs. 80.00 per kg. and the steel one for
Rs. 35.00 per kg. The cost of machining per unit is Rs. 150.00 for aluminium
and Rs. 170.00 for steel. Every kilogram of excess weight is associated with
a penalty of Rs. 1,300 due to increased fuel consumption. Which material
should be specified and what is the economic advantage of the selection per
unit?
Elementary Economic Analysis
(a) Cost of using aluminium metal for the jet engine part:
Weight of aluminium casting/unit = 1.2 kg
Cost of making aluminium casting = Rs. 80.00 per kg
Cost of machining aluminium casting per unit = Rs. 150.00
Total cost of jet engine part made of aluminium/unit
= Cost of making aluminium casting/unit
+ Cost of machining aluminium casting/unit
= 80  1.2 + 150 = 96 + 150
(b) Cost of jet engine part made of steel/unit:
Weight of steel casting/unit = 1.35 kg
Cost of making steel casting = Rs. 35.00 per kg
Cost of machining steel casting per unit = Rs. 170.00
Penalty of excess weight of steel casting = Rs. 1,300 per kg
Total cost of jet engine part made of steel/unit
= Cost of making steel casting/unit
+ Cost of machining steel casting/unit
+ Penalty for excess weight of steel casting
= 35  1.35 + 170 + 1,300(1.35 – 1.2)
The total cost/unit of a jet engine part made of aluminium is less
than that for an engine made of steel. Hence, aluminium is suggested for making
the jet engine part. The economic advantage of using aluminium over steel/unit
is Rs. 412.25 – Rs. 246 = Rs. 166.25
A company manufactures dining tables which mainly consist
of a wooden frame and a table top. The different materials used to manufacture
the tables and their costs are given in Table 2.1.
Data for Example 2.2
Description of item
Wood for frame and legs
Table top with sunmica finish
Leg bushes
Nails
Total labour
In view of the growing awareness towards deforestation and environmental
conservation, the company feels that the use of wood should be minimal. The
wooden top therefore could be replaced with a granite top. This would require
additional wood for the frame and legs to take the extra weight of the granite
top. The materials and labour requirements along with cost details to
manufacture a table with granite top are given in Table 2.2.
Granite table top
If the cost of the dining table with a granite top works out to be lesser than
that of the table with wooden top, the company is willing to manufacture dining
tables with granite tops. Compute the cost of manufacture of the table under
each of the alternatives described above and suggest the best alternative. Also,
find the economic advantage of the best alternative.
Solution (a) Cost of table with wooden top
Cost of wood for frame and legs = 12,000  0.1
Cost of wooden top
Cost of bushes
= 10  4
Cost of nails
= 300  (100/1,000) = Rs.
Cost of labour
= 50  15
Total
(b) Cost of table with granite top
Cost of wood for frame and legs = 12,000  0.15
Cost of granite top
= 800  1.62
= 25  4
= 300  (50/1,000) = Rs.
= 50  8
The cost of a table with granite top works out to be less than that of a table
with a wooden top. Hence, the table with granite top should be selected by the
manufacturer.
(c) Economic advantage
Cost of a table with wooden top
Cost of a table with granite top
Economic advantage of table with
granite top
Design Selection for a Product
The design modification of a product may result in reduced raw material
requirements, increased machinability of the materials and reduced labour.
Design is an important factor which decides the cost of the product for a
specified level of performance of that product.
The elementary economic analysis applied to the selection of design for a
product is illustrated with two example problems.
Two alternatives are under consideration for a tapered
fastening pin. Either design will serve the purpose and will involve the same
material and manufacturing cost except for the lathe and grinder operations.
Design A will require 16 hours of lathe time and 4.5 hours of grinder time
per 1,000 units. Design B will require 7 hours of lathe time and 12 hours of
grinder time per 1,000 units. The operating cost of the lathe including labour is
Rs. 200 per hour. The operating cost of the grinder including labour is Rs. 150
per hour. Which design should be adopted if 1,00,000 units are required per year
and what is the economic advantage of the best alternative?
Operating cost of lathe including labour = Rs. 200 per hr
Operating cost of grinder including labour = Rs. 150 per hr
(a) Cost of design A
No. of hours of lathe time per 1,000 units = 16 hr
No. of hours of grinder time per 1,000 units = 4.5 hr
Total cost of design A/1,000 units
= Cost of lathe operation per 1,000 units
+ Cost of grinder operation per 1,000 units
= 16  200 + 4.5  150
Total cost of design A/1,00,000 units = 3,875  1,00,000/1,000
(b) Cost of design B
No. of hours of lathe time per 1,000 units = 7 hr
No. of hours of grinder time per 1,000 units = 12 hr
Total cost of design B/1,000 units
= Cost of lathe operation/1,000 units
+ Cost of grinder operation/1,000 units
= 7  200 + 12  150
Total cost of design B/1,00,000 units = 3,200  1,00,000/1,000
DECISION The total cost/1,00,000 units of design B is less than that of design A.
Hence, design B is recommended for making the tapered fastening pin.
Economic advantage of the design B over design A per 1,00,000 units
= Rs. 3,87,500 – Rs. 3,20,000
EXAMPLE 2.4 (Design selection for a process industry).
The chief engineer
of refinery operations is not satisfied with the preliminary design for storage
tanks to be used as part of a plant expansion programme. The engineer who
submitted the design was called in and asked to reconsider the overall
dimensions in the light of an article in the Chemical Engineer, entitled “How to
size future process vessels?”
The original design submitted called for 4 tanks 5.2 m in diameter and 7 m
in height. From a graph of the article, the engineer found that the present ratio
of height to diameter of 1.35 is 111% of the minimum cost and that the
minimum cost for a tank was when the ratio of height to diameter was 4: 1. The
cost for the tank design as originally submitted was estimated to be
Rs. 9,00,000. What are the optimum tank dimensions if the volume remains the
same as for the original design? What total savings may be expected through the
redesign?
(a) Original design
Number of tanks = 4
Diameter of the tank = 5.2 m
Radius of the tank = 2.6 m
Height of the tank = 7 m
Ratio of height to diameter = 7/5.2 = 1.35
Volume/tank = (22/7)r 2 h = (22/7)(2.6)2  7
(b) New design
Cost of the old design = 111% of the cost of the new design (optimal
design)
Optimal ratio of the height to diameter = 4:1
h: d = 4: 1
Volume = (22/7)r 2 h = 148.72 (since, the volume remains the same)
h 3 = 148 72
/ )  64 = 3,028.48
h = 14.47 m
r = h/8 = 14.47/8 = 1.81 m
Therefore,
Diameter of the new design = 1.81  2
Cost of the new design = 9,00,000  (100/111)
Expected savings by the redesign = Rs. 9,00,000 – Rs. 8,10,810.81
Building Material Selection
As discussed in the introduction to this chapter, the sourcing of raw materials
will have a significant effect on the cost of any product. Hence, it is assumed
that the price of raw material is location dependent. While sourcing a raw
material, the cost of transportation is to be considered in conjunction with the
price of the raw material. This concept is demonstrated with a numerical
example.
In the design of buildings to be constructed in Alpha State, the
designer is considering the type of window frame to specify. Either steel or
aluminium window frames will satisfy the design criteria. Because of the remote
location of the building site and lack of building materials in Alpha State, the
window frames will be purchased in Beta State and transported for a distance
of 2,500 km to the site. The price of window frames of the type required is
Rs. 1,000 each for steel frames and Rs. 1,500 each for aluminium frames. The
weight of steel window frames is 75 kg each and that of aluminium window
frame is 28 kg each. The shipping rate is Re 1 per kg per 100 km. Which design
should be specified and what is the economic advantage of the selection?
Distance between Alpha State and Beta State = 2,500 km
Transportation cost = Re 1/kg/100 km
(a) Steel window frame
Price of steel window frame/unit = Rs 1,000
Weight of steel window frame/unit = 75 kg
Total cost of steel window frame/unit
= Price of steel window frame/unit
+ Transportation cost of steel window frame/unit
= 1,000 + (75  2,500  1)/100
(b) Aluminium window frame
Price of aluminium window frame/unit = Rs. 1,500
Weight of aluminium window frame/unit = 28 kg
Total cost of aluminium window frame/unit
= Price of aluminium window frame/unit
+ Transportation cost of aluminium window frame/unit
= 1,500 + (28  2,500  1)/100
The total cost/unit of the aluminium window frame is less than
that of steel window frame. Hence, aluminium window frame is recommended.
The economic advantage/unit of the aluminium window frame over the
steel window frame = Rs. 2,875 – 2,200
Process Planning/Process Modification
While planning for a new component, a feasible sequence of operations with the
least cost of processing is to be considered. The process sequence of a
component which has been planned in the past is not static. It is always subject
to modification with a view to minimize the cost of manufacturing the
component. So, the objective of process planning/process modification is to
identify the most economical sequence of operations to produce a component.
The steps in process planning are as follows:
Analyze the part drawing to get an overall picture of what is required.
Make recommendations to or consult with product engineers on
product design changes.
List the basic operations required to produce the part to the drawing or
specifications.
Determine the most practical and economical manufacturing method
and the form or tooling required for each operation.
Devise the best way to combine the operations and put them in
sequence.
Specify the gauging required for the process.
Steps 3–5 aim to determine the most practical and economical sequence of
operations to produce a component. This concept is demonstrated with a
numerical problem.
The process planning engineer of a firm listed the sequences
of operations as shown in Table 2.3 to produce a component.
Data for Example 2.6
Sequence
Process sequence
Turning – Milling – Shaping – Drilling
Turning – Milling – Drilling
All operations are performed with CNC machine
The details of processing times of the component for various operations and
their machine hour rates are summarized in Table 2.4.
Machine Hour Rates and Processing Times (minutes) for Example 2.6
Operation
Machine hour
rate
Turning
Milling
Shaping
Drilling
CNC operations
Find the most economical sequence of operations to manufacture the
component.
(a) Cost of component using process sequence 1.
The process
sequence 1 of the component is as follows:
The calculations for the cost of the above process sequence are summarized
Workings for Process Sequence 1
Time
Machine
hour rate
(b) Cost of component using process sequence 2.
The process sequence 2
of the component is as follows:
The calculations for the cost of the above process sequence are given in
Workings for Process Sequence 2
(c) Cost of component using process sequence 3.
The process sequence
3 of the component is as follows:
Only CNC operations
The calculations for the cost of the above process sequence are summarized
Workings for Process Sequence 3
The process sequence 2 has the least cost. Therefore, it should be selected
for manufacturing the component.
List and explain the different situations deserving elementary economic
analysis.
Explain the steps in the process planning.
In the design of an aircraft jet engine part, the designer has a choice of
specifying either an aluminium alloy casting or a steel casting. Either
material will provide equal service, but the aluminium casting will weigh
5 kg as compared with 7 kg for the steel casting.
The aluminium part can be cast for Rs. 125 per kg and the steel part can
be cast for Rs. 60 per kg. The cost of machining per unit is Rs. 200 for
the aluminium part and Rs. 250 for the steel part. Every kilogram of
excess weight is associated with a penalty of Rs. 2,500 due to increased
fuel consumption. Which material should be specified and what is the
economic advantage of the selection per unit?
Two alternatives are under consideration for a hexagonal bolt fastening
pin. Either design will serve equally well and will involve the same
material and manufacturing cost except for the lathe and grinder
operations.
Design A will require 20 hours of lathe time and 8 hours of grinder time
per 10,000 units. Design B will require 10 hours of lathe time and
22 hours of grinder time per 10,000 units. The operating cost of the
lathe including labour is Rs. 400 per hour. The operating cost of the
grinder including labour is Rs. 300 per hour. Which design should be
adopted if 10,00,000 units are required per year and what is the economic
advantage of the best alternative?
A building contractor can source door frames from either a nearby shop
or a far-off forest area. The cost details are as summarized in the following
table. The total requirement of wood for the construction work is 75 tons.
Items
Nearby shop
Far-off forest area
Distance to site
Negligible
Transportation cost
per ton per km
Material cost/ton
Find the best alternative for buying the wooden frames. Also find the
economic advantage of the best decision.
Consider Example 2.4. Rework this example if the ratio of the height
to diameter corresponding to the minimum cost is 6:1 instead of 4:1.
The process planning engineer of a firm listed down the sequences of
operations, as shown in the following table to produce a component:
The details of process time for the components for various operations and
their machine hour rates are tabulated now.
CNC operation
Interest rate is the rental value of money. It represents the growth of capital per
unit period. The period may be a month, a quarter, semiannual or a year. An
interest rate 15% compounded annually means that for every hundred rupees
invested now, an amount of Rs. 15 will be added to the account at the end of
the first year. So, the total amount at the end of the first year will be Rs. 115.
At the end of the second year, again 15% of Rs. 115, i. e. Rs. 17.25 will be added
to the account. Hence the total amount at the end of the second year will be
Rs. 132.25. The process will continue thus till the specified number of years.
TIME VALUE OF MONEY
If an investor invests a sum of Rs. 100 in a fixed deposit for five years with an
interest rate of 15% compounded annually, the accumulated amount at the end
of every year will be as shown in Table 3.1.
Compound Amounts
(amount of deposit = Rs. 100.00)
Year end
Interest
Compound amount
The formula to find the future worth in the third column is
F = P  (1 + i)n
where
P = principal amount invested at time 0,
F = future amount,
Interest Formulas and Their Applications
i = interest rate compounded annually,
n = period of deposit.
The maturity value at the end of the fifth year is Rs. 201.14. This means that
the amount Rs. 201.14 at the end of the fifth year is equivalent to Rs. 100.00
at time 0 (i. e. at present). This is diagrammatically shown in Fig. 3.1. This
explanation assumes that the inflation is at zero percentage.
Time value of money.
Alternatively, the above concept may be discussed as follows: If we want
Rs. 100.00 at the end of the nth year, what is the amount that we should deposit
now at a given interest rate, say 15%? A detailed working is shown in Table 3.2.
Present Worth Amounts
(rate of interest = 15%)
End of year
Present worth
after n year(s)
The formula to find the present worth in the second column is
i n
From Table 3.2, it is clear that if we want Rs. 100 at the end of the fifth
year, we should now deposit an amount of Rs. 49.72. Similarly, if we want
Rs. 100.00 at the end of the 10 th year, we should now deposit an amount of
Also, this concept can be stated as follows:
A person has received a prize from a finance company during the recent
festival contest. But the prize will be given in either of the following two modes:
1. Spot payment of Rs. 24.72 or
2. Rs. 100 after 10 years from now (this is based on 15% interest rate
compounded annually).
If the prize winner has no better choice that can yield more than 15%
interest rate compounded annually, and if 15% compounded annually is the
common interest rate paid in all the finance companies, then it makes no
difference whether he receives Rs. 24.72 now or Rs. 100 after 10 years.
On the other hand, let us assume that the prize winner has his own business
wherein he can get a yield of 24% interest rate (more than 15%) compounded
annually, it is better for him to receive the prize money of Rs. 24.72 at present
and utilize it in his business. If this option is followed, the equivalent amount
for Rs. 24.72 at the end of the 10 th year is Rs. 212.45. This example clearly
demonstrates the time value of money.
While making investment decisions, computations will be done in many ways.
To simplify all these computations, it is extremely important to know how to use
interest formulas more effectively. Before discussing the effective application of
the interest formulas for investment-decision making, the various interest
formulas are presented first.
Interest rate can be classified into simple interest rate and compound
interest rate.
In simple interest, the interest is calculated, based on the initial deposit for
every interest period. In this case, calculation of interest on interest is not
applicable. In compound interest, the interest for the current period is computed
based on the amount (principal plus interest up to the end of the previous
period) at the beginning of the current period.
The notations which are used in various interest formulae are as follows:
P = principal amount
n = No. of interest periods
i = interest rate (It may be compounded monthly, quarterly, semiannually
or annually)
F = future amount at the end of year n
A = equal amount deposited at the end of every interest period
G = uniform amount which will be added/subtracted period after period to/
from the amount of deposit A 1 at the end of period 1
Single-Payment Compound Amount
Here, the objective is to find the single future sum (F) of the initial payment (P)
made at time 0 after n periods at an interest rate i compounded every period.
The cash flow diagram of this situation is shown in Fig. 3.2.
The formula to obtain the single-payment compound amount is
F = P(1 + i)n = P(F/P, i, n)
(F/P, i, n) is called as single-payment compound amount factor.
A person deposits a sum of Rs. 20,000 at the interest rate of
18% compounded annually for 10 years. Find the maturity value after 10 years.
P = Rs. 20,000
i = 18% compounded annually
n = 10 years
= 20,000  5.234 = Rs. 1,04,680
The maturity value of Rs. 20,000 invested now at 18% compounded yearly
is equal to Rs. 1,04,680 after 10 years.
Single-Payment Present Worth Amount
Here, the objective is to find the present worth amount (P) of a single future sum
(F) which will be received after n periods at an interest rate of i compounded
at the end of every interest period.
The corresponding cash flow diagram is shown in Fig. 3.3.
Cash flow diagram of single-payment compound amount.
Cash flow diagram of single-payment present worth amount.
The formula to obtain the present worth is
(P/F, i, n) is termed as single-payment present worth factor.
n
A person wishes to have a future sum of Rs. 1,00,000 for his
son’s education after 10 years from now. What is the single-payment that he
should deposit now so that he gets the desired amount after 10 years? The bank
gives 15% interest rate compounded annually.
F = Rs. 1,00,000
i = 15%, compounded annually
P = F/(1 + i)n = F(P/F, i, n)
= 1,00,000  0.2472
The person has to invest Rs. 24,720 now so that he will get a sum of
Rs. 1,00,000 after 10 years at 15% interest rate compounded annually.
Equal-Payment Series Compound Amount
In this type of investment mode, the objective is to find the future worth of n
equal payments which are made at the end of every interest period till the end
of the nth interest period at an interest rate of i compounded at the end of each
interest period. The corresponding cash flow diagram is shown in Fig. 3.4.
Cash flow diagram of equal-payment series compound amount.
A = equal amount deposited at the end of each interest period
i = rate of interest
F = single future amount
The formula to get F is
F = A (1
i
(F/A, i, n) is termed as equal-payment series compound amount factor.
A person who is now 35 years old is planning for his retired
life. He plans to invest an equal sum of Rs. 10,000 at the end of every year for
the next 25 years starting from the end of the next year. The bank gives 20%
interest rate, compounded annually. Find the maturity value of his account when
he is 60 years old.
A = Rs. 10,000
n = 25 years
The corresponding cash flow diagram is shown in Fig. 3.5.
= 10,000  471.981
The future sum of the annual equal payments after 25 years is equal to
Equal-Payment Series Sinking Fund
In this type of investment mode, the objective is to find the equivalent
amount (A) that should be deposited at the end of every interest period for n
interest periods to realize a future sum (F) at the end of the nth interest period
at an interest rate of i.
The corresponding cash flow diagram is shown in Fig. 3.6.
Cash flow diagram of equal-payment series sinking fund.
A = equal amount to be deposited at the end of each interest period
F = single future amount at the end of the nth period
(A/F, i, n) is called as equal-payment series sinking fund factor.
A company has to replace a present facility after 15 years at
an outlay of Rs. 5,00,000. It plans to deposit an equal amount at the end of every
year for the next 15 years at an interest rate of 18% compounded annually. Find
the equivalent amount that must be deposited at the end of every year for the
F = Rs. 5,00,000
n = 15 years
The corresponding cash flow diagram is shown in Fig. 3.7.
= 5,00,000  0.0164
The annual equal amount which must be deposited for 15 years is Rs. 8,200.
Equal-Payment Series Present Worth Amount
The objective of this mode of investment is to find the present worth of an equal
payment made at the end of every interest period for n interest periods at an
interest rate of i compounded at the end of every interest period.
The corresponding cash flow diagram is shown in Fig. 3.8. Here,
P = present worth
A = annual equivalent payment
i = interest rate
The formula to compute P is
P = A (1
(P/A, i, n) is called equal-payment series present worth factor.
A company wants to set up a reserve which will help the
company to have an annual equivalent amount of Rs. 10,00,000 for the next 20
years towards its employees welfare measures. The reserve is assumed to grow
at the rate of 15% annually. Find the single-payment that must be made now as
the reserve amount.
A = Rs. 10,00,000
n = 20 years
The corresponding cash flow diagram is illustrated in Fig. 3.9.
Cash flow diagram of equal-payment series present worth amount.
P = A (
= 10,00,000  (P/A, 15%, 20)
= 10,00,000  6.2593
The amount of reserve which must be set-up now is equal to Rs. 62,59,300.
Equal-Payment Series Capital Recovery Amount
The objective of this mode of investment is to find the annual equivalent
amount (A) which is to be recovered at the end of every interest period for n
interest periods for a loan (P) which is sanctioned now at an interest rate of i
compounded at the end of every interest period (see Fig. 3.10).
Cash flow diagram of equal-payment series capital recovery amount.
P = present worth (loan amount)
A = annual equivalent payment (recovery amount)
The formula to compute P is as follows:
A = P i
where,
(A/P, i, n) is called equal-payment series capital recovery factor.
A bank gives a loan to a company to purchase an equipment
worth Rs. 10,00,000 at an interest rate of 18% compounded annually. This
amount should be repaid in 15 yearly equal installments. Find the installment
amount that the company has to pay to the bank.
P = Rs. 10,00,000
The corresponding cash flow diagram is shown in Fig. 3.11.
= 10,00,000  (A/P, 18%, 15)
The annual equivalent installment to be paid by the company to the bank
Uniform Gradient Series Annual Equivalent Amount
The objective of this mode of investment is to find the annual equivalent amount
of a series with an amount A 1 at the end of the first year and with an equal
increment (G) at the end of each of the following n – 1 years with an interest
rate i compounded annually.
The corresponding cash flow diagram is shown in Fig. 3.12.
Cash flow diagram of uniform gradient series annual equivalent amount.
The formula to compute A under this situation is
A = A 1 + G (1
in
= A 1 + G (A/G, i, n)
(A/G, i, n) is called uniform gradient series factor.
A person is planning for his retired life. He has 10 more years
of service. He would like to deposit 20% of his salary, which is Rs. 4,000, at
the end of the first year, and thereafter he wishes to deposit the amount
with an annual increase of Rs. 500 for the next 9 years with an interest rate of
15%. Find the total amount at the end of the 10 th year of the above series.
Here,
A 1 = Rs. 4,000
G = Rs. 500
A =? & F =?
The cash flow diagram is shown in Fig. 3.13.
= A 1 + G(A/G, i, n)
= 4,000 + 500(A/G, 15%, 10)
= 4,000 + 500  3.3832
This is equivalent to paying an equivalent amount of Rs. 5,691.60 at the end of
every year for the next 10 years. The future worth sum of this revised series at
the end of the 10 th year is obtained as follows:
At the end of the 10 th year, the compound amount of all his payments will
A person is planning for his retired life. He has 10 more years
of service. He would like to deposit Rs. 8,500 at the end of the first year and
thereafter he wishes to deposit the amount with an annual decrease of Rs. 500
for the next 9 years with an interest rate of 15%. Find the total amount at the
end of the 10 th year of the above series.
A 1 = Rs. 8,500
G = –Rs. 500
The cash flow diagram is shown in Fig. 3.14.
A = A 1 – G (
= A 1 – G (A/G, i, n)
= 8,500 – 500(A/G, 15%, 10)
= 8,500 – 500  3.3832
This is equivalent to paying an equivalent amount of Rs. 6,808.40 at the end of
every year for the next 10 years.
The future worth sum of this revised series at the end of the 10 th year is
obtained as follows:
At the end of the 10 th year, the compound amount of all his payments is
Effective Interest Rate
Let i be the nominal interest rate compounded annually. But, in practice, the
compounding may occur less than a year. For example, compounding may be
monthly, quarterly, or semi-annually. Compounding monthly means that the
interest is computed at the end of every month. There are 12 interest periods in
a year if the interest is compounded monthly. Under such situations, the formula
to compute the effective interest rate, which is compounded annually, is
Effective interest rate, R = 1 + /
i = the nominal interest rate
C = the number of interest periods in a year.
A person invests a sum of Rs. 5,000 in a bank at a nominal
interest rate of 12% for 10 years. The compounding is quarterly. Find the
maturity amount of the deposit after 10 years.
P = Rs. 5,000
i = 12% (Nominal interest rate)
No. of interest periods per year = 4
No. of interest periods in 10 years = 10  4 = 40
Revised No. of periods (No. of quarters), N = 40
Interest rate per quarter, r = 12%/4
= 3%, compounded quarterly.
F = P(1 + r)N = 5,000(1 + 0.03)40
No. of interest periods per year, C = 4
Effective interest rate, R = (1 + i/C)C – 1
= (1 + 12%/4)4 – 1
= 12.55%, compounded annually.
F = P(1 + R)n = 5,000(1 + 0.1255)10
BASES FOR COMPARISON OF ALTERNATIVES
In most of the practical decision environments, executives will be forced to
select the best alternative from a set of competing alternatives. Let us assume
that an organization has a huge sum of money for potential investment and there
are three different projects whose initial outlay and annual revenues during their
lives are known. The executive has to select the best alternative among these
three competing projects.
There are several bases for comparing the worthiness of the projects. These
bases are:
1. Present worth method
2. Future worth method
3. Annual equivalent method
4. Rate of return method
These methods are discussed in detail in Chapters 4–7.
1. Explain the time value of money.
2. Give practical applications of various interest formulas.
3. A person deposits a sum of Rs. 1,00,000 in a bank for his son’s education
who will be admitted to a professional course after 6 years. The bank pays
15% interest rate, compounded annually. Find the future amount of the
deposited money at the time of admitting his son in the professional
course.
4. A person needs a sum of Rs. 2,00,000 for his daughter’s marriage which
will take place 15 years from now. Find the amount of money that he should
deposit now in a bank if the bank gives 18% interest, compounded annually.
5. A person who is just 30 years old is planning for his retired life. He plans
to invest an equal sum of Rs. 10,000 at the end of every year for the next
30 years starting from the end of next year. The bank gives 15% interest
rate, compounded annually. Find the maturity value of his account when he
is 60 years old.
6. A company is planning to expand its business after 5 years from now. The
expected money required for the expansion programme is Rs. 5,00,00,000.
The company can invest Rs. 50,00,000 at the end of every year for the next
five years. If the assured rate of return of investment is 18% for the
company, check whether the accumulated sum in the account would be
sufficient to meet the fund for the expansion programme. If not, find the
difference in amounts for which the company should make some other
arrangement after 5 years.
7. A financial institution introduces a plan to pay a sum of Rs. 15,00,000 after
10 years at the rate of 18%, compounded annually. Find the annual
equivalent amount that a person should invest at the end of every year for
the next 10 years to receive Rs. 15,00,000 after 10 years from the institution.
8. A company is planning to expand its business after 5 years from now.
The money required for the expansion programme is Rs. 4,00,00,000.
What annual equivalent amount should the company deposit at the end
of every year at an interest rate of 15% compounded annually to get
Rs. 4,00,00,000 after 5 years from now?
9. A company wants to set-up a reserve which will help it to have an annual
equivalent amount of Rs. 15,00,000 for the next 20 years towards its
employees welfare measures. The reserve is assumed to grow at the rate of
15% annually. Find the single-payment that must be made as the reserve
amount now.
10. An automobile company recently advertised its car for a down payment of
Rs. 1,50,000. Alternatively, the car can be taken home by customers without
making any payment, but they have to pay an equal yearly amount of
Rs. 25,000 for 15 years at an interest rate of 18%, compounded annually.
Suggest the best alternative to the customers.
11. A company takes a loan of Rs. 20,00,000 to modernize its boiler section.
The loan is to be repaid in 20 equal installments at 12% interest rate,
compounded annually. Find the equal installment amount that should be
paid for the next 20 years.
12. A bank gives loan to a company to purchase an equipment which is worth
of Rs. 5,00,000, at an interest rate of 18% compounded annually. This
amount should be repaid in 25 yearly equal installments. Find the
installment amount that the company has to pay to the bank.
13. A working woman is planning for her retired life. She has 20 more years
of service. She would like to deposit 10% of her salary which is Rs. 5,000
at the end of the first year and thereafter she wishes to deposit the same
amount (Rs. 5,000) with an annual increase of Rs. 1,000 for the next 14
years with an interest rate of 18%. Find the total amount at the end of the
15 th year of the above series.
14. Consider the following cash flow diagram. Find the total amount at the end
of the 10 th year at an interest rate of 12%, compounded annually.
15. A person is planning for his retired life. He has 10 more years of service.
He would like to deposit 20% of his salary, which is Rs. 10,000, at the end
of the first year and thereafter he wishes to deposit the same amount
(Rs. 10,000) with an annual increase of Rs. 2,000 for the next 9 years with
an interest rate of 20%. Find the total amount at the end of the 10 th year
of the above series.
16. A person is planning for his retired life. He has 10 more years of service.
He would like to deposit Rs. 30,000 at the end of the first year and
thereafter he wishes to deposit the same amount (Rs. 30,000) with an
annual decrease of Rs. 2,000 for the next 9 years with an interest rate of
18%. Find the total amount at the end of the 10 th year of the above series.
17. A person invests a sum of Rs. 50,000 in a bank at a nominal interest rate
of 18% for 15 years. The compounding is monthly. Find the maturity
amount of the deposit after 15 years.
In this method of comparison, the cash flows of each alternative will be reduced
to time zero by assuming an interest rate i. Then, depending on the type of
decision, the best alternative will be selected by comparing the present worth
amounts of the alternatives.
The sign of various amounts at different points in time in a cash flow
diagram is to be decided based on the type of the decision problem.
In a cost dominated cash flow diagram, the costs (outflows) will be assigned
with positive sign and the profit, revenue, salvage value (all inflows), etc. will
be assigned with negative sign.
In a revenue/profit-dominated cash flow diagram, the profit, revenue,
salvage value (all inflows to an organization) will be assigned with positive sign.
The costs (outflows) will be assigned with negative sign.
In case the decision is to select the alternative with the minimum cost, then
the alternative with the least present worth amount will be selected. On the other
hand, if the decision is to select the alternative with the maximum profit, then
the alternative with the maximum present worth will be selected.
REVENUE-DOMINATED CASH FLOW DIAGRAM
A generalized revenue-dominated cash flow diagram to demonstrate the present
worth method of comparison is presented in Fig. 4.1.
Revenue-dominated cash flow diagram.
j
Rj
Rn
In Fig. 4.1, P represents an initial investment and Rj the net revenue at the
end of the jth year. The interest rate is i, compounded annually. S is the salvage
value at the end of the nth year.
To find the present worth of the above cash flow diagram for a given
interest rate, the formula is
PW(i) = – P + R 1[1/(1 + i)1] + R 2[1/(1 + i)2] +...
+ Rj[1/(1 + i) j] + Rn[1/(1 + i)n] + S[1/(1 + i)n]
In this formula, expenditure is assigned a negative sign and revenues are
assigned a positive sign.
If we have some more alternatives which are to be compared with this
alternative, then the corresponding present worth amounts are to be computed
and compared. Finally, the alternative with the maximum present worth amount
should be selected as the best alternative.
COST-DOMINATED CASH FLOW DIAGRAM
A generalized cost-dominated cash flow diagram to demonstrate the present
worth method of comparison is presented in Fig. 4.2.
In Fig. 4.2, P represents an initial investment, Cj the net cost of operation
and maintenance at the end of the jth year, and S the salvage value at the end
of the nth year.
To compute the present worth amount of the above cash flow diagram for
a given interest rate i, we have the formula
PW(i) = P + C 1[1/(1 + i)1] + C 2[1/(1 + i)2] +... + Cj[1/(1 + i) j]
+ Cn[1/(1 + i)n] – S[1/(1 + i)n]
In the above formula, the expenditure is assigned a positive sign and the revenue
a negative sign. If we have some more alternatives which are to be compared
with this alternative, then the corresponding present worth amounts are to be
computed and compared. Finally, the alternative with the minimum present
worth amount should be selected as the best alternative.
Cost-dominated cash flow diagram.
Cj
Cn
In this section, the concept of present worth method of comparison applied to
the selection of the best alternative is demonstrated with several illustrations.
Alpha Industry is planning to expand its production operation.
It has identified three different technologies for meeting the goal. The initial
outlay and annual revenues with respect to each of the technologies are
summarized in Table 4.1. Suggest the best technology which is to be
implemented based on the present worth method of comparison assuming 20%
interest rate, compounded annually.
Initial outlay
Annual revenue
Life
(years)
In all the technologies, the initial outlay is assigned a negative sign
and the annual revenues are assigned a positive sign.
Initial outlay, P = Rs. 12,00,000
Annual revenue, A = Rs. 4,00,000
Interest rate, i = 20%, compounded annually
Life of this technology, n = 10 years
The cash flow diagram of this technology is as shown in Fig. 4.3.
Cash flow diagram for technology 1.
The present worth expression for this technology is
PW(20%)1 = –12,00,000 + 4,00,000  (P/A, 20%, 10)
= –12,00,000 + 4,00,000  (4.1925)
= –12,00,000 + 16,77,000
Initial outlay, P = Rs. 20,00,000
Annual revenue, A = Rs. 6,00,000
The cash flow diagram of this technology is shown in Fig. 4.4.
Cash flow diagram for technology 2.
PW(20%)2 = – 20,00,000 + 6,00,000  (P/A, 20%, 10)
= – 20,00,000 + 6,00,000  (4.1925)
= – 20,00,000 + 25,15,500
Initial outlay, P = Rs. 18,00,000
Annual revenue, A = Rs. 5,00,000
The cash flow diagram of this technology is shown in Fig. 4.5.
Cash flow diagram for technology 3.
PW(20%)3 = –18,00,000 + 5,00,000  (P/A, 20%, 10)
= –18,00,000 + 5,00,000  (4.1925)
= –18,00,000 + 20,96,250
From the above calculations, it is clear that the present worth of technology 2
is the highest among all the technologies. Therefore, technology 2 is suggested
for implementation to expand the production.
An engineer has two bids for an elevator to be installed in a
new building. The details of the bids for the elevators are as follows:
Bid
Engineer’s estimates
Initial cost
Service
Annual operations
life (years)
& maintenance
cost (Rs.)
Alpha Elevator Inc.
Beta Elevator Inc.
Determine which bid should be accepted, based on the present worth method of
comparison assuming 15% interest rate, compounded annually.
Bid 1: Alpha Elevator Inc.
Initial cost, P = Rs. 4,50,000
Annual operation and maintenance cost, A = Rs. 27,000
Life = 15 years
Interest rate, i = 15%, compounded annually.
The cash flow diagram of bid 1 is shown in Fig. 4.6.
Cash flow diagram for bid 1.
The present worth of the above cash flow diagram is computed as follows:
PW(15%) = 4,50,000 + 27,000(P/A, 15%, 15)
= 4,50,000 + 27,000  5.8474
= 4,50,000 + 1,57,879.80
Bid 2: Beta Elevator Inc.
Initial cost, P = Rs. 5,40,000
Annual operation and maintenance cost, A = Rs. 28,500
The cash flow diagram of bid 2 is shown in Fig. 4.7.
Cash flow diagram for bid 2.
The present worth of the above cash flow diagram is computed as follows:
PW(15%) = 5,40,000 + 28,500(P/A, 15%, 15)
= 5,40,000 + 28,500  5.8474
= 5,40,000 + 1,66,650.90
The total present worth cost of bid 1 is less than that of bid 2. Hence, bid 1 is
to be selected for implementation. That is, the elevator from Alpha Elevator
Inc. is to be purchased and installed in the new building.
Investment proposals A and B have the net cash flows as
follows:
Proposal
End of years
Compare the present worth of A with that of B at i = 18%. Which proposal
should be selected?
Present worth of A at i = 18%.
The cash flow diagram of proposal A is
shown in Fig. 4.8.
Cash flow diagram for proposal A.
The present worth of the above cash flow diagram is computed as
PWA(18%) = –10,000 + 3,000(P/F, 18%, 1) + 3,000(P/F, 18%, 2)
+ 7,000(P/F, 18%, 3) + 6,000(P/F, 18%, 4)
= –10,000 + 3,000 (0.8475) + 3,000(0.7182)
Present worth of B at i = 18%.
The cash flow diagram of the proposal
B is shown in Fig. 4.9.
The present worth of the above cash flow diagram is calculated as
PWB(18%) = –10,000 + 6,000(P/F, 18%, 1) + 6,000(P/F, 18%, 2)
+ 3,000(P/F, 18%, 3) + 3,000(P/F, 18%, 4)
= –10,000 + 6,000(0.8475) + 6,000(0.7182)
At i = 18%, the present worth of proposal B is higher than that of proposal A.
Therefore, select proposal B.
A granite company is planning to buy a fully automated
granite cutting machine. If it is purchased under down payment, the cost of the
machine is Rs. 16,00,000. If it is purchased under installment basis, the
company has to pay 25% of the cost at the time of purchase and the remaining
amount in 10 annual equal installments of Rs. 2,00,000 each. Suggest the best
alternative for the company using the present worth basis at i = 18%,
compounded annually.
There are two alternatives available for the company:
1. Down payment of Rs. 16,00,000
2. Down payment of Rs. 4,00,000 and 10 annual equal installments of
Cash flow diagram for proposal B.
Present worth calculation of the second alternative.
The cash flow diagram
of the second alternative is shown in Fig. 4.10.
Cash flow diagram for the second alternative.
The present worth of the above cash flow diagram is computed as
PW(18%) = 4,00,000 + 2,00,000(P/A, 18%, 10)
= 4,00,000 + 2,00,000  4.4941
The present worth of this option is Rs. 12,98,820, which is less than the first
option of complete down payment of Rs. 16,00,000. Hence, the company should
select the second alternative to buy the fully automated granite cutting machine.
A finance company advertises two investment plans. In plan 1,
the company pays Rs. 12,000 after 15 years for every Rs. 1,000 invested now.
In plan 2, for every Rs. 1,000 invested, the company pays Rs. 4,000 at the end
of the 10 th year and Rs. 4,000 at the end of 15 th year. Select the best investment
plan from the investor’s point of view at i = 12%, compounded annually.
The cash flow diagram for plan 1 is illustrated in Fig. 4.11.
Cash flow diagram for plan 1.
The present worth of the above cash flow diagram is calculated as
PW(12%) = –1,000 + 12,000(P/F, 12%, 15)
The cash flow diagram for plan 2 is shown in Fig. 4.12.
The present worth of the above cash flow diagram is computed as
PW(12%) = –1,000 + 4,000(P/F, 12%, 10) + 4,000(P/F, 12%, 15)
= –1,000 + 4,000(0.3220) + 4,000(0.1827)
The present worth of plan 1 is more than that of plan 2. Therefore, plan 1 is the
best plan from the investor’s point of view.
Novel Investment Ltd. accepts Rs. 10,000 at the end of
every year for 20 years and pays the investor Rs. 8,00,000 at the end of the
20 th year. Innovative Investment Ltd. accepts Rs. 10,000 at the end of
every year for 20 years and pays the investor Rs. 15,00,000 at the end of
the 25 th year. Which is the best investment alternative? Use present worth
base with i = 12%.
Novel Investment Ltd’s plan.
The cash flow diagram of Novel
Investment Ltd’s plan is shown in Fig. 4.13.
Cash flow diagram for plan 2.
The present worth of the above cash flow diagram is computed as
PW(12%) = –10,000(P/A, 12%, 20) + 8,00,000(P/F, 12%, 20)
Innovative Investment Ltd’s plan.
The cash flow diagram of the Innovative
Investment Ltd’s plan is illustrated in Fig. 4.14.
Cash flow diagram for Novel Investment Ltd.
Cash flow diagram for Innovative Investment Ltd.
The present worth of the above cash flow diagram is calculated as
PW(12%) = –10,000(P/A, 12%, 20) + 15,00,000(P/F, 12%, 25)
The present worth of Innovative Investment Ltd’s plan is more than that of
Novel Investment Ltd’s plan. Therefore, Innovative Investment Ltd’s plan is the
best from investor’s point of view.
A small business with an initial outlay of Rs. 12,000 yields
Rs. 10,000 during the first year of its operation and the yield increases by
Rs. 1,000 from its second year of operation up to its 10 th year of operation. At
the end of the life of the business, the salvage value is zero. Find the present
worth of the business by assuming an interest rate of 18%, compounded
annually.
Initial investment, P = Rs. 12,000
Income during the first year, A = Rs. 10,000
Annual increase in income, G = Rs. 1,000
i = 18%, compounded annually
The cash flow diagram for the small business is depicted in Fig. 4.15.
Cash flow diagram for the small business.
The equation for the present worth is
PW(18%) = –12,000 + (10,000 + 1,000  (A/G, 18%, 10))  (P/A, 18%, 10)
= –12,000 + (10,000 + 1,000  3.1936)  4.4941
= –12,000 + 59,293.36
The present worth of the small business is Rs. 47,293.36.
1. A project involves an initial outlay of Rs. 30,00,000 and with the following
transactions for the next five years. The salvage value at the end of the life
of the project after five years is Rs. 2,00,000. Draw a cash flow diagram of
the project and find its present worth by assuming i = 15%, compounded
End
Maintenance and
Revenue
of year
operating expense
2. Find the present worth of the following cash flow series. Assume i = 15%,
Cash flow
3. Consider the following cash flow series over a 20-year period. Assuming
the interest rate as 18% compounded annually, compute the present worth
of the series; give your comments.
Cash flow (Rs.)
4. The cost of erecting an oil well is Rs. 1,50,00,000. The annual equivalent
yield from the oil well is Rs. 30,00,000. The salvage value after its useful
life of 10 years is Rs. 2,00,000. Assuming an interest rate of 18%,
compounded annually, find out whether the erection of the oil well is
financially feasible, based on the present worth method.
5. The details of the feasibility report of a project are as shown below. Check
the feasibility of the project based on present worth method, using i = 20%.
Initial outlay = Rs. 50,00,000
Life of the project = 20 years.
Annual equivalent revenue = Rs. 15,00,000
Modernizing cost at the end of the 10 th year = Rs. 20,00,000
Salvage value at the end of project life = Rs. 5,00,000.
6. Consider the following cash flow diagram. Find the present worth using an
interest rate of 15%, compounded annually.
7. An automobile company recently advertised its car for a down payment of
Rs. 1,50,000. Alternatively, the car can be taken home by customers without
making any payment, but they have to pay an equal yearly amount of
Rs. 25,000 for 15 years at an interest rate of 18%, compounded annually.
You are asked to advise the best alternative for the customers based on
the present worth method of comparison.
8. The cash flows of two project proposals are as given below. Each of the
project has an expected life of 10 years. Select the best project based on
present worth method of comparison using an interest rate of 18%,
Initial
Annual
Salvage
outlay
equivalent
value after
9. A company has two alternatives for satisfying its daily travel requirements
of its employees for the next five years:
Alternative 1: Renting a vehicle at a cost of Rs. 10,00,000 per year.
Alternative 2: Buying a vehicle for Rs. 5,00,000 with an operating and
maintenance cost of Rs. 3,50,000 per year. The salvage value of the vehicle
after five years is Rs. 1,00,000.
Select the best alternative based on the present worth method of comparison
using the interest rate of 20%, compounded annually.
10. A working woman is planning for her retired life. She has 20 more years
of service. She would like to have an annual equivalent amount of
Rs. 3,00,000, starting from the end of the first year of her retirement. Find
the single amount that should be deposited now so that she receives the
above mentioned annual equivalent amount at the end of every year for
20 years after her retirement. Assume i = 15%, compounded annually.
In the future worth method of comparison of alternatives, the future worth of
various alternatives will be computed. Then, the alternative with the maximum
future worth of net revenue or with the minimum future worth of net cost will
be selected as the best alternative for implementation.
A generalized revenue-dominated cash flow diagram to demonstrate the future
worth method of comparison is presented in Fig. 5.1.
In Fig. 5.1, P represents an initial investment, Rj the net-revenue at the end
of the jth year, and S the salvage value at the end of the nth year.
The formula for the future worth of the above cash flow diagram for a given
interest rate, i is
FW(i) = –P(1 + i)n + R 1(1 + i)n–1 + R 2(1 + i)n–2 +...
+ Rj(1 + i)n–j +... + Rn + S
In the above formula, the expenditure is assigned with negative sign and the
revenues are assigned with positive sign.
If we have some more alternatives which are to be compared with this
alternative, then the corresponding future worth amounts are to be computed and
compared. Finally, the alternative with the maximum future worth amount
A generalized cost-dominated cash flow diagram to demonstrate the future
worth method of comparison is given in Fig. 5.2.
In Fig. 5.2, P represents an initial investment, Cj the net cost of operation
and maintenance at the end of the jth year, and S the salvage value at the end
The formula for the future worth of the above cash flow diagram for a given
FW(i) = P(1 + i)n + C 1(1 + i )n–1 + C 2(1 + i)n–2 +...
+ Cj(1 + i)n–j +... + Cn – S
In this formula, the expenditures are assigned with positive sign and revenues
with negative sign. If we have some more alternatives which are to be compared
with this alternative, then the corresponding future worth amounts are to be
computed and compared. Finally, the alternative with the minimum future worth
amount should be selected as the best alternative.
In this section, several examples highlighting the applications of the future
worth method of comparison are presented.
Consider the following two mutually exclusive alternatives:
Alternative
Future Worth Method
At i = 18%, select the best alternative based on future worth method of
comparison.
Alternative A
Initial investment, P = Rs. 50,00,000
Annual equivalent revenue, A = Rs. 20,00,000
Interest rate, i = 18%, compounded annually
Life of alternative A = 4 years
The cash flow diagram of alternative A is shown in Fig. 5.3.
Cash flow diagram for alternative A.
The future worth amount of alternative B is computed as
FWA(18%) = –50,00,000(F/P, 18%, 4) + 20,00,000(F/A, 18%, 4)
Alternative B
Initial investment, P = Rs. 45,00,000
Annual equivalent revenue, A = Rs. 18,00,000
Life of alternative B = 4 years
The cash flow diagram of alternative B is illustrated in Fig. 5.4.
Cash flow diagram for alternative B.
FWB(18%) = –45,00,000(F/P, 18%, 4) + 18,00,000 (F/A, 18%, 4)
The future worth of alternative A is greater than that of alternative B. Thus,
alternative A should be selected.
A man owns a corner plot. He must decide which of the
several alternatives to select in trying to obtain a desirable return on his
investment. After much study and calculation, he decides that the two best
alternatives are as given in the following table:
Build
Build soft
gas station
ice-cream stand
First cost (Rs.)
Annual property taxes (Rs.)
Annual income (Rs.)
Life of building (years)
Salvage value (Rs.)
Evaluate the alternatives based on the future worth method at i = 12%.
Alternative 1—Build gas station
First cost = Rs. 20,00,000
Net annual income = Annual income – Annual property tax
= Rs. 8,00,000 – Rs. 80,000
Life = 20 years
Interest rate = 12%, compounded annually
The cash flow diagram for this alternative is depicted in Fig. 5.5.
The future worth of alternative 1 is computed as
FW 1(12%) = –20,00,000(F/P, 12%, 20) + 7,20,000(F/A, 12%, 20)
Cash flow diagram for alternative 1.
Alternative 2—Build soft ice-cream stand
First cost = Rs. 36,00,000
= Rs. 9,80,000 – Rs. 1,50,000
The cash flow diagram for this alternative is shown in Fig. 5.6.
Cash flow diagram for alternative 2.
The future worth of alternative 2 is calculated as
FW 2(12%) = –36,00,000(F/P, 12%, 20) + 8,30,000(F/A, 12%, 20)
The future worth of alternative 1 is greater than that of alternative 2. Thus,
building the gas station is the best alternative.
The cash flow diagram of two mutually exclusive alternatives
are given in Figs. 5.7 and 5.8.
(a) Select the best alternative based on future worth method at i = 8%.
(b) Rework part (a) with i = 9% and 20%
(a) Evaluation at i = 8%
Alternative 1—This comes under equal payment gradient series.
P = Rs. 5,00,000
A 1 = Rs. 50,000
G = Rs. 50,000
n = 6 years
The formula for the future worth of alternative 1 is
FW 1(8%) = –P(F/P, 8%, 6) + [A 1 + G(A/G, 8%, 6)]  (F/A, 8%, 6)
= –5,00,000(1.587) + [50,000 + 50,000(2.2764)]  7.336
= –79,35,000 + 1,63,820  7.336
= –79,35,000 + 12,01,784
Alternative 2—This comes under equal payment gradient series.
P = Rs. 7,00,000
A 1 = Rs. 70,000
G = Rs. 70,000
The formula for the future worth of alternative 2 is
FW 2(8%) = –P(F/P, 8%, 6) + [A 1 + G(A/G, 8%, 6)]  (F/A, 8%, 6)
FW 2(8%) = –7,00,000  1.587 + [70,000 + 70,000  2.2764]  7.336
= –11,10,900 + 16,82,497
The future worth of alternative 2 is more than that of alternative 1. Therefore,
alternative 2 must be selected.
(b) (i) Evaluation at i = 9%:
The formula for the future worth of alternative 1 is as follows:
FW 1(9%) = – P(F/P, 9%, 6) + [A 1 + G(A/G, 9%, 6)]  (F/A, 9%, 6)
= – 5,00,000 (1.677) + [50,000 + 50,000 (2.2498)]  7.523
= – 8,38,500 + 12,22,412.27
The formula for the future worth of the alternative 2 is
FW 2(9%) = –P(F/P, 9%, 6) + [A 1 + G(A/G, 9%, 6)]  (F/A, 9%, 6)
= –7,00,000  1.677 + [70,000 + 70,000  2.2498]  7.523
= –11,73,900 + 17,11,377.18
The future worth of alternative 2 is more than that of alternative 1. Therefore,
(ii) Evaluation at i = 20%:
FW 1(20%) = –P(F/P, 20%, 6) + [A 1 + G(A/G, 20%, 6)]  (F/A, 20%, 6)
= –5,00,000(2.986) + [50,000 + 50,000(1.9788)]  9.93
= –14,93,000 + 14,78,974.20
The negative sign of the future worth amount indicates that alternative 1
incurs loss.
FW 2(20%) = – P(F/P, 20%, 6) + [A 1 + G(A/G, 20%, 6)]  (F/A, 20%, 6)
= –7,00,000  2.986 + [70,000 + 70,000  1.9788]  9.93
= –20,90,200 + 20,70,563.88
The negative sign of the above future worth amount indicates that alternative 2
incurs loss. Thus, none of the two alternatives should be selected.
M/S Krishna Castings Ltd. is planning to replace its annealing
furnace. It has received tenders from three different original manufacturers of
annealing furnace. The details are as follows.
Manufacturer
Initial cost (Rs.)
Annual operation and
maintenance cost (Rs.)
Salvage value after
Which is the best alternative based on future worth method at i = 20%?
First cost, P = Rs. 80,00,000
Life, n = 12 years
Annual operating and maintenance cost, A = Rs. 8,00,000
Salvage value at the end of furnace life = Rs. 5,00,000
The cash flow diagram for this alternative is shown in Fig. 5.9.
Cash flow diagram for manufacturer 1.
The future worth amount of alternative 1 is computed as
FW 1(20%) = 80,00,000(F/P, 20%, 12) + 8,00,000(F/A, 20%, 12) – 5,00,000
= 80,00,000(8.916) + 8,00,000(39.581) – 5,00,000
Alternative 2— Manufacturer 2
First cost, P = Rs. 70,00,000
Annual operating and maintenance cost, A = Rs. 9,00,000
Salvage value at the end of furnace life = Rs. 4,00,000
The cash flow diagram for this alternative is given in Fig. 5.10.
Cash flow diagram for manufacturer 2.
The future worth amount of alternative 2 is computed as
FW 2(20%) = 70,00,000(F/P, 20%, 12) + 9,00,000(F/A, 20%, 12) – 4,00,000
= 70,00,000(8.916) + 9,00,000 (39.581) – 4,00,000
First cost, P = Rs. 90,00,000
Annual operating and maintenance cost, A = Rs. 8,50,000
Salvage value at the end of furnace life = Rs. 7,00,000
The cash flow diagram for this alternative is illustrated in Fig. 5.11.
Cash flow diagram for manufacturer 3.
The future worth amount of alternative 3 is calculated as
FW 3(20%) = 90,00,000(F/P, 20%, 12) + 8,50,000(F/A, 20%, 12) – 7,00,000
= 90,00,000(8.916) + 8,50,000(39.581) – 7,00,000
The future worth cost of alternative 2 is less than that of the other two
alternatives. Therefore, M/s. Krishna castings should buy the annealing furnace
A company must decide whether to buy machine A or
machine B:
Machine A
Machine B
Useful life, in years
Salvage value at the end
of machine life
Annual maintenance cost
At 12% interest rate, which machine should be selected? (Use future worth
method of comparison).
Initial cost of the machine, P = Rs. 4,00,000
Life, n = 4 years
Salvage value at the end of machine life, S = Rs. 2,00,000
Annual maintenance cost, A = Rs. 40,000
Interest rate, i = 12%, compounded annually.
The cash flow diagram of machine A is given in Fig. 5.12.
Cash flow diagram for machine A.
The future worth function of Fig. 5.12 is
FWA(12%) = 4,00,000  (F/P, 12%, 4) + 40,000  (F/A, 12%, 4) – 2,00,000
= 4,00,000  (1.574) + 40,000 (4.779) – 2,00,000
Initial cost of the machine, P = Rs. 8,00,000
Salvage value at the end of machine life, S = Rs. 5,50,000
Annual maintenance cost, A = zero.
The cash flow diagram of the machine B is illustrated in Fig. 5.13.
The future worth function of Fig 5.13 is
FWB(12%) = 8,00,000 (F/P, 12%, 4) – 5,50,000
The future worth cost of machine A is less than that of machine B.
Therefore, machine A should be selected.
Cash flow diagram for machine B.
1. A suburban taxi company is considering buying taxis with diesel engines
instead of petrol engines. The cars average 50,000 km a year, with a useful
life of three years for the taxi with the petrol engine and four years for the
diesel taxi. Other comparative information are as follows:
Diesel
Petrol
Vehicle cost
Fuel cost per litre
Mileage, in km/litre
Annual insurance premium
of vehicle life
Determine the more economical choice based on the future worth method
of comparison if the interest rate is 15%, compounded annually.
2. A motorcycle is sold for Rs. 50,000. The motorcycle dealer is willing to sell
it on the following terms:
(a) Make no down payment but pay Rs. 1,500 at the end of each of the first
four months and Rs. 3,000 at the end of each month after that for 18
continuous months.
(b) Make no down payment but pay a total amount of Rs. 90,000 at the end
of the 22 nd month; till that time the buyer should mortgage property
worth of Rs. 50,000, at present.
Based on these terms and a 12% annual interest rate compounded monthly,
find the best alternative for the buyer based on the future worth method of
3. Consider the following two mutually exclusive alternatives.
Uniform annual benefit
Useful life (years)
Using a 15% interest rate, determine which alternative should be selected
based on the future worth method of comparison.
4. A company must decide whether to buy machine A or machine B:
Useful life, (years)
At 15% interest rate, which machine should be selected? (Use the future
worth method of comparison.)
5. Due to increasing awareness of customers, two different television
manufacturing companies started a marketing war. The details of
advertisements of the companies are as follows:
Brand X
Brand Y
Selling price of a TV set
Amount returned to buyer after 5 years
Select the most economical brand from the customer’s point of view using
the future worth method of comparison, assuming an interest rate of 15%,
6. Alpha Finance Company is coming with an option of accepting
Rs. 10,000 now and paying a sum of Rs. 1,60,000 after 20 years. Beta
Finance Company is coming with a similar option of accepting Rs. 10,000
now and paying a sum of Rs. 3,00,000 after 25 years. Compare and select
the best alternative based on the future worth method of comparison with
15% interest rate, compounded annually.
7. An insurance company gives an endowment policy for a person aged 30
years. The yearly premium for an insured sum of Rs. 1,00,000 is Rs. 4,000.
The policy will mature after 25 years. Also, the person is entitled for a
bonus of Rs. 75 per thousand per year at the end of the policy. If a person
survives till the end of the 25 th year:
(a) What will be the total sum that he will get from the insurance company
at that time?
(b) Instead of paying the premiums for the insurance policy, if the person
invests an equal sum of Rs. 4,000 at the end of each year for the next
25 years in some other scheme which is having similar tax benefit, find
the future worth of the investment at 15% interest rate, compounded
(c) Rate the above alternatives assuming that the person is sure of living
for the next 25 years.
In the annual equivalent method of comparison, first the annual equivalent cost
or the revenue of each alternative will be computed. Then the alternative with
the maximum annual equivalent revenue in the case of revenue-based
comparison or with the minimum annual equivalent cost in the case of costbased comparison will be selected as the best alternative.
A generalized revenue-dominated cash flow diagram to demonstrate the annual
equivalent method of comparison is presented in Fig. 6.1.
In Fig. 6.1, P represents an initial investment, Rj the net revenue at the end
of the jth year, and S the salvage value at the end of the nth year.
The first step is to find the net present worth of the cash flow diagram using
the following expression for a given interest rate, i:
PW(i) = –P + R 1/(1 + i)1 + R 2/(1 + i)2 +...
+ Rj/(1 + i) j +... + Rn/(1 + i)n + S/(1 + i)n
In the above formula, the expenditure is assigned with a negative sign and
the revenues are assigned with a positive sign.
Annual Equivalent Method
In the second step, the annual equivalent revenue is computed using the
following formula:
where (A/P, i, n) is called equal payment series capital recovery factor.
If we have some more alternatives which are to be compared with this
alternative, then the corresponding annual equivalent revenues are to be
computed and compared. Finally, the alternative with the maximum annual
equivalent revenue should be selected as the best alternative.
A generalized cost-dominated cash flow diagram to demonstrate the annual
equivalent method of comparison is illustrated in Fig. 6.2.
In Fig. 6.2, P represents an initial investment, Cj the net cost of operation
and maintenance at the end of the jth year, and S the salvage value at the end
The first step is to find the net present worth of the cash flow diagram using
the following relation for a given interest rate, i.
PW(i) = P + C 1/(1 + i)1 + C 2/(1 + i)2 +...
+ Cj/(1 + i) j +... + Cn/(1 + i)n – S/(1 + i)n
In the above formula, each expenditure is assigned with positive sign and
the salvage value with negative sign. Then, in the second step, the annual
equivalent cost is computed using the following equation:
where (A/P, i, n) is called as equal-payment series capital recovery factor.
As in the previous case, if we have some more alternatives which are to be
compared with this alternative, then the corresponding annual equivalent costs
are to be computed and compared. Finally, the alternative with the minimum
annual equivalent cost should be selected as the best alternative.
If we have some non-standard cash flow diagram, then we will have to
follow the general procedure for converting each and every transaction to time
zero and then convert the net present worth into an annual equivalent cost/
revenue depending on the type of the cash flow diagram. Such procedure is to
be applied to all the alternatives and finally, the best alternative is to be selected.
Instead of first finding the present worth and then figuring out the annual
equivalent cost/revenue, an alternate method which is as explained below can be
used. In each of the cases presented in Sections 6.2 and 6.3, in the first step, one
can find the future worth of the cash flow diagram of each of the alternatives.
Then, in the second step, the annual equivalent cost/revenue can be obtained by
using the equation:
where (A/F, i, n) is called equal-payment series sinking fund factor.
In this section, the application of the annual equivalent method is demonstrated
with several numerical examples.
A company provides a car to its chief executive. The owner
of the company is concerned about the increasing cost of petrol. The cost per
litre of petrol for the first year of operation is Rs. 21. He feels that the cost of
petrol will be increasing by Re.1 every year. His experience with his company
car indicates that it averages 9 km per litre of petrol. The executive expects to
drive an average of 20,000 km each year for the next four years. What is the
annual equivalent cost of fuel over this period of time?. If he is offered similar
service with the same quality on rental basis at Rs. 60,000 per year, should the
owner continue to provide company car for his executive or alternatively
provide a rental car to his executive? Assume i = 18%. If the rental car is
preferred, then the company car will find some other use within the company.
Average number of km run/year = 20,000 km
Number of km/litre of petrol = 9 km
Petrol consumption/year = 20,000/9 = 2222.2 litre
Cost/litre of petrol for the 1 st year = Rs. 21
Cost/litre of petrol for the 2 nd year = Rs. 21.00 + Re. 1.00
Cost/litre of petrol for the 3 rd year = Rs. 22.00 + Re. 1.00
Cost/litre of petrol for the 4 th year = Rs. 23.00 + Re. 1.00
Fuel expenditure for 1 st year = 2222.2  21 = Rs. 46,666.20
Fuel expenditure for 2 nd year = 2222.2  22 = Rs. 48,888.40
Fuel expenditure for 3 rd year = 2222.2  23 = Rs. 51,110.60
Fuel expenditure for 4 th year = 2222.2  24 = Rs. 53,332.80
The annual equal increment of the above expenditures is Rs. 2,222.20 (G).
The cash flow diagram for this situation is depicted in Fig. 6.3.
Uniform gradient series cash flow diagram.
In Fig. 6.3, A 1 = Rs. 46,666.20 and G = Rs. 2,222.20
A = A 1 + G(A/G, 18%, 4)
= 46,666.20 + 2222.2(1.2947)
The proposal of using the company car by spending for petrol by the
company will cost an annual equivalent amount of Rs. 49,543.28 for four years.
This amount is less than the annual rental value of Rs. 60,000. Therefore, the
company should continue to provide its own car to its executive.
A company is planning to purchase an advanced machine
centre. Three original manufacturers have responded to its tender whose
particulars are tabulated as follows:
Down payment
Yearly equal
No. of
installment
installments
Determine the best alternative based on the annual equivalent method by
assuming i = 20%, compounded annually.
Down payment, P = Rs. 5,00,000
Yearly equal installment, A = Rs. 2,00,000
i = 20%, compounded annually
The cash flow diagram for manufacturer 1 is shown in Fig. 6.4.
The annual equivalent cost expression of the above cash flow diagram is
AE 1(20%) = 5,00,000(A/P, 20%, 15) + 2,00,000
Down payment, P = Rs. 4,00,000
Yearly equal installment, A = Rs. 3,00,000
The cash flow diagram for the manufacturer 2 is shown in Fig. 6.5.
The annual equivalent cost expression of the above cash flow diagram is
AE 2(20%) = 4,00,000(A/P, 20%, 15) + 3,00,000
Down payment, P = Rs. 6,00,000
Yearly equal installment, A = Rs. 1,50,000
The cash flow diagram for manufacturer 3 is shown in Fig. 6.6.
The annual equivalent cost expression of the above cash flow diagram is
AE 3(20%) = 6,00,000(A/P, 20%, 15) + 1,50,000
The annual equivalent cost of manufacturer 3 is less than that of
manufacturer 1 and manufacturer 2. Therefore, the company should buy the
advanced machine centre from manufacturer 3.
A company invests in one of the two mutually exclusive
alternatives. The life of both alternatives is estimated to be 5 years with the
following investments, annual returns and salvage values.
Investment (Rs.)
Annual equal return (Rs.)
Determine the best alternative based on the annual equivalent method by
assuming i = 25%.
Solution Alternative A
Initial investment, P = Rs. 1,50,000
Annual equal return, A = Rs. 60,000
Salvage value at the end of machine life, S = Rs. 15,000
Life = 5 years
Interest rate, i = 25%, compounded annually
The cash flow diagram for alternative A is shown in Fig. 6.7.
The annual equivalent revenue expression of the above cash flow diagram
is as follows:
AEA(25%) = –1,50,000(A/P, 25%, 5) + 60,000 + 15,000(A/F, 25%, 5)
= –1,50,000(0.3718) + 60,000 + 15,000(0.1218)
Initial investment, P = Rs. 1,75,000
Annual equal return, A = Rs. 70,000
Salvage value at the end of machine life, S = Rs. 35,000
The cash flow diagram for alternative B is shown in Fig. 6.8.
The annual equivalent revenue expression of the above cash flow diagram is
AEB(25%) = –1,75,000(A/P, 25%, 5) + 70,000 + 35,000(A/F, 25%, 5)
= –1,75,000(0.3718) + 70,000 + 35,000(0.1218)
The annual equivalent net return of alternative B is more than that of
alternative A. Thus, the company should select alternative B.
A certain individual firm desires an economic analysis to
determine which of the two machines is attractive in a given interval of time.
The minimum attractive rate of return for the firm is 15%. The following data
are to be used in the analysis:
Machine X
Machine Y
First cost
Estimated life
Salvage value
Which machine would you choose? Base your answer on annual equivalent
cost.
Solution Machine X
First cost, P = Rs. 1,50,000
Estimated salvage value at the end of machine life, S = Rs. 0.
Annual maintenance cost, A = Rs. 0.
The cash flow diagram of machine X is illustrated in Fig. 6.9.
Cash flow diagram for machine X.
The annual equivalent cost expression of the above cash flow diagram is
First cost, P = Rs. 2,40,000
Estimated salvage value at the end of machine life, S = Rs. 60,000
Annual maintenance cost, A = Rs. 4,500
The cash flow diagram of machine Y is depicted in Fig. 6.10.
Cash flow diagram for machine Y.
The annual equivalent cost expression of the above cash flow diagram is
AEY(15%) = 2,40,000(A/P, 15%, 12) + 4,500 – 6,000(A/F, 15%, 12)
= 2,40,000(0.1845) + 4,500 – 6,000(0.0345)
The annual equivalent cost of machine X is less than that of machine Y. So,
machine X is the more cost effective machine.
Two possible routes for laying a power line are under study.
Data on the routes are as follows:
Around the lake
Under the lake
Length
Useful life
Maintenance cost
Yearly power loss
If 15% interest is used, should the power line be routed around the lake or
under the lake?
Solution Alternative 1— Around the lake
First cost = 1,50,000  15 = Rs. 22,50,000
Maintenance cost/yr = 6,000  15 = Rs. 90,000
Power loss/yr = 15,000  15 = Rs. 2,25,000
Maintenance cost and power loss/yr = Rs. 90,000 + Rs. 2,25,000
Salvage value = 90,000  15 = Rs. 13,50,000
The annual equivalent cost expression of the above cash flow diagram is
AE 2(15%) = 37,50,000(A/P, 15%, 15) + 1,35,000 – 7,50,000(A/F, 15%, 15)
= 37,50,000(0.1710) + 1,35,000 – 7,50,000(0.0210)
The annual equivalent cost of alternative 1 is less than that of alternative 2.
Therefore, select the route around the lake for laying the power line.
A suburban taxi company is analyzing the proposal of buying
The cash flow diagram for this alternative is shown in Fig. 6.11.
The annual equivalent cost expression of the above cash flow diagram is
AE 1(15%) = 22,50,000(A/P, 15%, 15) + 3,15,000 – 13,50,000(A/F, 15%, 15)
= 22,50,000(0.1710) + 3,15,000 – 13,50,000(0.0210)
Alternative 2—Under the lake
First cost = 7,50,000  5 = Rs. 37,50,000
Maintenance cost/yr = 12,000  5 = Rs. 60,000
Power loss/yr = 15,000  5 = Rs. 75,000
Maintenance cost and power loss/yr = Rs. 60,000 + Rs. 75,000
Salvage value = 1,50,000  5 = Rs. 7,50,000
The cash flow diagram for this alternative is shown in Fig. 6.12.
cars with diesel engines instead of petrol engines. The cars average 60,000 km
a year with a useful life of three years for the petrol taxi and four years for the
diesel taxi. Other comparative details are as follows:
Vehicle cost (Rs.)
Fuel cost per litre (Rs.)
Mileage in km/litre
Annual repairs (Rs.)
Annual insurance premium (Rs.)
Resale value at the end of vehicle life (Rs.)
Determine the more economical choice if interest rate is 20%, compounded
Solution Alternative 1— Purchase of diesel taxi
Vehicle cost = Rs. 3,90,000
Life = 4 years
Number of litres/year 60,000/30 = 2,000 litres
Fuel cost/yr = 2,000  8 = Rs. 16,000
Fuel cost, annual repairs and insurance premium/yr
= Rs. 16,000 + Rs. 9,000 + Rs. 15,000 = Rs. 40,000
Salvage value at the end of vehicle life = Rs. 60,000
The cash flow diagram for alternative 1 is shown in Fig. 6.13.
The annual equivalent cost expression of the above cash flow diagram is
AE(20%) = 3,90,000(A/P, 20%, 4) + 40,000 – 60,000(A/F, 20%, 4)
= 3,90,000(0.3863) + 40,000 – 60,000(0.1863)
Alternative 2—Purchase of petrol taxi
Vehicle cost = Rs. 3,60,000
Life = 3 years
Number of litres/year 60,000/20 = 3,000 litres
Fuel cost/yr = 3,000  20 = Rs. 60,000
= Rs. 60,000 + Rs. 6,000 + Rs. 15,000 = Rs. 81,000
Salvage value at the end of vehicle life = Rs. 90,000
The cash flow diagram for alternative 2 is shown in Fig. 6.14.
The annual equivalent cost expression of the above cash flow diagram is
AE(20%) = 3,60,000(A/P, 20%, 3) + 81,000 – 90,000(A/F, 20%, 3)
= 3,60,000(0.4747) + 81,000 – 90,000(0.2747)
The annual equivalent cost of purchase and operation of the cars with diesel
engine is less than that of the cars with petrol engine. Therefore, the taxi
company should buy cars with diesel engine. (Note: Comparison is done on
common multiple lives of 12 years.)
Ramu, a salesman, needs a new car for use in his business. He
expects that he will be promoted to a supervisory job at the end of third year
and so his concern now is to have a car for the three years he expects to be “on
the road”. The company will reimburse their salesman each month the fuel cost
and maintenance cost. Ramu has decided to drive a low-priced automobile. He
finds, however, that there are two different ways of obtaining the automobile. In
either case, the fuel cost and maintenance cost are borne by the company.
(a) Purchase for cash at Rs. 3,90,000.
(b) Lease a car. The monthly charge is Rs. 10,500 on a 36-month lease
payable at the end of each month. At the end of the three-year period,
the car is returned to the leasing company.
Ramu believes that he should use a 12% interest rate compounded monthly
in determining which alternative to select. If the car could be sold for
Rs. 1,20,000 at the end of the third year, which option should he use to obtain it?
Alternative 1—Purchase car for cash
Purchase price of the car = Rs. 3,90,000
Life = 3 years = 36 months
Salvage value after 3 years = Rs. 1,20,000
Interest rate= 12% (nominal rate, compounded annually)
= 1% compounded monthly
The cash flow diagram for alternative 1 is shown in Fig. 6.15.
The monthly equivalent cost expression [ME(1%)] of the above cash flow
diagram is
ME(1%) = 3,90,000(A/P, 1%, 36) – 1,20,000(A/F, 1%, 36)
Alternative 2—Use of car under lease
Monthly lease amount for 36 months = Rs. 10,500
The cash flow diagram for alternative 2 is illustrated in Fig. 6.16.
Monthly equivalent cost = Rs.10,500.
The monthly equivalent cost of alternative 1 is less than that of alternative
2. Hence, the salesman should purchase the car for cash.
machine B.
Salvage value at the end of machine life (Rs.)
Annual maintenance (Rs.)
At 15% interest rate, which machine should be purchased?
Solution Machine A
Initial cost = Rs. 3,00,000
Useful life (years) = 4
Salvage value at the end of machine life = Rs. 2,00,000
Annual maintenance = Rs. 30,000
Interest rate = 15%, compounded annually
The cash flow diagram of machine A is depicted in Fig. 6.17.
The annual equivalent cost expression of the above cash flow diagram is
AE(15%) = 3,00,000(A/P, 15%, 4) + 30,000 – 2,00,000(A/F, 15%, 4)
= 3,00,000(0.3503) + 30,000 – 2,00,000(0.2003)
Initial cost = Rs. 6,00,000
Salvage value at the end of machine life = Rs. 3,00,000
Annual maintenance = Rs. 0.
The cash flow diagram of machine B is illustrated in Fig. 6.18.
The annual equivalent cost expression of the above cash flow diagram is
AE(15%) = 6,00,000(A/P, 15%, 4) – 3,00,000(A/F, 15%, 4)
Since the annual equivalent cost of machine A is less than that of
machine B, it is advisable to buy machine A.
Jothi Lakshimi has arranged to buy some home recording
equipment. She estimates that it will have a five year useful life and no salvage
value at the end of equipment life. The dealer, who is a friend has offered Jothi
Lakshimi two alternative ways to pay for the equipment.
(a) Pay Rs. 60,000 immediately and Rs. 15,000 at the end of one year.
(b) Pay nothing until the end of fourth year when a single payment of
Rs. 90,000 must be made.
If Jothi Lakshimi believes 12% is a suitable interest rate, which alternative
is the best for her?
Down payment = Rs. 60,000
Payment after one year = Rs. 15,000
The cash flow diagram for alternative 1 is shown in Fig. 6.19.
The present worth equation of the above cash flow diagram is
PW(12%) = 60,000 + 15,000(P/F, 12%, 1)
= 60,000 + 15,000(0.8929)
The above present worth is represented in Fig. 6.20.
Resultant cash flow diagram.
The annual equivalent expression of the above cash flow diagram is
Payment after four years = Rs. 90,000
The cash flow diagram for alternative 2 is shown in Fig. 6.21.
Cash flow diagram of alternative 2.
The annual equivalent cost expression of the above cash flow diagram is
The annual equivalent cost of alternative 2 is less than that of alternative 1.
Hence, Jothi Lakshimi should select alternative 2 for purchasing the home
equipment.
A transport company has been looking for a new tyre for its
truck and has located the following alternatives:
Brand
Tyre warranty
Price per tyre
(months)
If the company feels that the warranty period is a good estimate of the tyre
life and that a nominal interest rate (compounded annually) of 12% is
appropriate, which tyre should it buy?
In all the cases, the interest rate is 12%. This is equivalent to 1% per
month.
Brand A
Tyre warranty = 12 months
Price/tyre = Rs. 1,200
The cash flow diagram for brand A is shown in Fig. 6.22.
Cash flow diagram of brand A.
The annual equivalent cost expression of the above cash flow diagram is
Brand B
Tyre warranty = 24 months
Price/tyre = Rs. 1,800
The cash flow diagram for brand B is shown in Fig. 6.23.
Cash flow diagram of brand B.
The annual equivalent cost expression of the above cash flow diagram is
Brand C
Tyre warranty = 36 months
Price/tyre = Rs. 2,100
The cash flow diagram for brand C is shown in Fig. 6.24.
Cash flow diagram of brand C.
The annual equivalent expression of the above cash flow diagram is
Brand D
Tyre warranty = 48 months
Price/tyre = Rs. 2,700
The cash flow diagram for brand D is shown in Fig. 6.25.
Cash flow diagram of brand D.
The annual equivalent cost expression of the above cash flow diagram is
Here, minimum common multiple lives of tyres is considered. This is 144
months. Therefore, the comparison is made on 144 month’s basis.
The annual equivalent cost of brand C is less than that of other brands.
Hence, it should be used in the vehicles of the trucking company. It should be
replaced four times during the 144-month period.
1. A company has three proposals for expanding its business operations. The
details are as follows:
Each alternative has insignificant salvage value at the end of its life.
Assuming an interest rate of 15%, compounded annually, find the best
alternative for expanding the business operations of the company using the
annual equivalent method.
2. An automobile dealer has recently advertised for its new car. There are
three alternatives of purchasing the car which are explained below.
Alternative 1 The customer can take delivery of a car after making a down
payment of Rs. 25,000. The remaining money should be paid in 36 equal
monthly installments of Rs. 10,000 each.
Alternative 2 The customer can take delivery of the car after making a
down payment of Rs. 1,00,000. The remaining money should be paid in 36
equal monthly installments of Rs. 7,000 each.
Alternative 3 The customer can take delivery of the car by making full
payment of Rs. 3,00,000.
Suggest the best alternative of buying the cars for the customers by
assuming an interest rate of 20% compounded annually. Use the annual
equivalent method.
3. A small-scale industry is in the process of buying a milling machine. The
purchase value of the milling machine is Rs. 60,000. It has identified two
banks for loan to purchase the milling machine. The banks can give only
80% of the purchase value of the milling machine as loan. In Urban Bank,
the loan is to be repaid in 60 equal monthly installments of Rs. 2,500 each.
In State Bank, the loan is to be repaid in 40 equal monthly installments of
Rs. 4,500 each. Suggest the most economical loan scheme for the company,
based on the annual equivalent method of comparison. Assume a nominal
rate of 24%, compounded monthly.
4. There are two alternatives of replacing a machine. The details of the
alternatives are as follows:
Purchase value of the new machine
Life of the machine
Salvage value of the new machine at
the end of its life
Annual operation and maintenance cost
Buyback price of the existing machine
Suggest the best replacement option for the company using the annual
equivalent cost method of comparison by assuming 20% interest rate,
5. A company receives two options for purchasing a copier machine for its
office.
Option 1 Make a down payment of Rs. 30,000 and take delivery of the
copier machine. The remaining money is to be paid in 24 equal monthly
installments of Rs. 4,500 each.
Option 2 Make a full payment of Rs. 1,00,000 and take delivery of the
copier machine.
Suggest the best option for the company to buy the copier machine based
on the annual equivalent method of comparison by assuming 15% interest
rate, compounded annually.
6. Find the best alternative using the annual equivalent method of comparison.
Assume an interest rate of 15% compounded annually.
Annual receipt (Rs.)
The rate of return of a cash flow pattern is the interest rate at which the present
worth of that cash flow pattern reduces to zero. In this method of comparison,
the rate of return for each alternative is computed. Then the alternative which
has the highest rate of return is selected as the best alternative.
In this type of analysis, the expenditures are always assigned with a
negative sign and the revenues/inflows are assigned with a positive sign.
A generalized cash flow diagram to demonstrate the rate of return method
of comparison is presented in Fig. 7.1.
Generalized cash flow diagram.
In the above cash flow diagram, P represents an initial investment, Rj the
net revenue at the end of the jth year, and S the salvage value at the end of the
nth year.
The first step is to find the net present worth of the cash flow diagram using
the following expression at a given interest rate, i.
PW(i) = – P + R 1/(1 + i)1 + R 2/(1 + i)2 +...
+ Rj/(1 + i) j +... + Rn/(1 + i)n + S/(1 + i)n
Now, the above function is to be evaluated for different values of i until the
present worth function reduces to zero, as shown in Fig. 7.2.
In the figure, the present worth goes on decreasing when the interest
rate is increased. The value of i at which the present worth curve cuts the
X-axis is the rate of return of the given proposal/project. It will be very
difficult to find the exact value of i at which the present worth function
reduces to zero.
So, one has to start with an intuitive value of i and check whether the
present worth function is positive. If so, increase the value of i until PW(i)
becomes negative. Then, the rate of return is determined by interpolation
method in the range of values of i for which the sign of the present worth
function changes from positive to negative.
In this section, the concept of rate of return calculation is demonstrated with
suitable examples.
A person is planning a new business. The initial outlay and
cash flow pattern for the new business are as listed below. The expected life of
the business is five years. Find the rate of return for the new business.
Period
Initial investment = Rs. 1,00,000
Annual equal revenue = Rs. 30,000
The cash flow diagram for this situation is illustrated in Fig. 7.3.
Present worth function graph.
Cash flow diagram.
10 12 14 16 18
Interest rate (%)
Rate of return
Negative
Positive
Present
worth
PWi
The present worth function for the business is
PW(i) = –1,00,000 + 30,000(P/A, i, 5)
When i = 10%,
PW(10%) = –1,00,000 + 30,000(P/A, 10%, 5)
When i = 15%,
PW(15%) = –1,00,000 + 30,000(P/A, 15%, 5)
When i = 18%,
PW(18%) = –1,00,000 + 30,000(P/A, 18%, 5)
Therefore, the rate of return for the new business is 15.252%.
A company is trying to diversify its business in a new product
line. The life of the project is 10 years with no salvage value at the end of its
life. The initial outlay of the project is Rs. 20,00,000. The annual net profit is
Rs. 3,50,000. Find the rate of return for the new business.
Life of the product line (n) = 10 years
Initial outlay = Rs. 20,00,000
Annual net profit = Rs. 3,50,000
Scrap value after 10 years = 0
The cash flow diagram for this situation is shown in Fig. 7.4.
The formula for the net present worth function of the situation is
PW(i) = –20,00,000 + 3,50,000(P/A, i, 10)
PW(10%) = –20,00,000 + 3,50,000(P/A, 10%, 10)
When i = 12%,
PW(12%) = –20,00,000 + 3,50,000(P/A, 12%, 10)
Therefore, the rate of return of the new product line is 11.74%
A firm has identified three mutually exclusive investment
proposals whose details are given below. The life of all the three alternatives is
estimated to be five years with negligible salvage value. The minimum attractive
rate of return for the firm is 12%.
Investment
Annual net income
Find the best alternative based on the rate of return method of comparison.
Calculation of rate of return for alternative A 1
Initial outlay = Rs. 1,50,000
Annual profit = Rs. 45,570
The cash flow diagram for alternative A 1 is shown in Fig. 7.5.
Cash flow diagram for alternative A 1.
The formula for the net present worth of alternative A 1 is given as
PW(i) = –1,50,000 + 45,570(P/A, i, 5)
PW(10%) = –1,50,000 + 45,570(P/A, 10%, 5)
PW(12%) = –1,50,000 + 45,570(P/A, 12%, 5)
PW(15%) = –1,50,000 + 45,570(P/A, 15%, 5)
PW(18%) = –1,50,000 + 45,570(P/A, 18%, 5)
Therefore, the rate of return of the alternative A 1 is
Calculation of rate of return for alternative A 2
Initial outlay = Rs. 2,10,000
Annual profit = Rs. 58,260
Life of alternative A 2 = 5 years
The cash flow diagram for alternative A 2 is shown in Fig. 7.6.
Cash flow diagram for alternative A 2.
The formula for the net present worth of this alternative is
PW(i) = –2,10,000 + 58,260(P/A, i, 5)
PW(12%) = –2,10,000 + 58,260(P/A, 12%, 5)
When i = 13%,
PW(13%) = –2,10,000 + 58,260(P/A, 13%, 5)
Therefore, the rate of return of alternative A 2 is
i = 12 % +
= 12 % + 0 %
Calculation of rate of return for alternative A 3
Initial outlay = Rs. 2,55,000
Annual profit = Rs. 69,000
Life of alternative A 3 = 5 years
The cash flow diagram for alternative A 3 is depicted in Fig. 7.7.
Cash flow diagram for alternative A 3.
The formula for the net present worth of this alternative A 3 is
PW(i) = –2,55,000 + 69,000(P/A, i, 5)
When i = 11%,
PW(11%) = –2,55,000 + 69,000(P/A, 11%, 5)
PW(12%) = –2,55,000 + 69,000(P/A, 12%, 5)
Therefore, the rate of return for alternative A 3 is
The rates of return for the three alternatives are now tabulated.
From the above data, it is clear that the rate of return for alternative A 3 is
less than the minimum attractive rate of return of 12%. So, it should not be
considered for comparison. The remaining two alternatives are qualified for
consideration. Among the alternatives A 1 and A 2, the rate of return of alternative
A 1 is greater than that of alternative A 2. Hence, alternative A 1 should be
selected.
For the cash flow diagram shown in Fig. 7.8, compute the rate
of return. The amounts are in rupees.
For the positive cash flows of the problem,
A 1 = Rs. 150,
G = Rs. 150
The annual equivalent of the positive cash flows of the uniform gradient
series is given by
A = A 1 + G(A/G, i, n)
= 150 + 150(A/G, i, 5)
The formula for the present worth of the whole diagram
= –1,275 + [150 + 150(A/G, i, 5)]  (P/A, i, 5)
PW(10%) = –1,275 + [150 + 150(A/G, 10%, 5)] (P/A, 10%, 5)
= –1,275 + [150 + 150(1.8101)]  (3.7908)
PW(12%) = –1,275 + [150 + 150(A/G, 12%, 5)]  (P/A, 12%, 5)
= –1,275 + [150 + 150(1.7746)]  (3.6048)
PW(15%) = –1,275 + [150 + 150(A/G, 15%, 5)]  (P/A, 15%, 5)
= –1,275 + [150 + 150(1.7228)]  (3.3522)
PW(18%) = –1,275 + [150 + 150(A/G, 18%, 5)]  (P/A, 18%, 5)
= –1,275 + [150 + 150(1.6728)]  (3.1272)
Therefore, the rate of return for the cash flow diagram is
= 15% + 2.45% = 17.45%
A company is planning to expand its present business activity.
It has two alternatives for the expansion programme and the corresponding cash
flows are tabulated below. Each alternative has a life of five years and a
negligible salvage value. The minimum attractive rate of return for the company
is 12%. Suggest the best alternative to the company.
Initial investment
Yearly revenue
Initial outlay = Rs. 5,00,000
Annual revenue = Rs. 1,70,000
Life of alternative 1 = 5 years
The cash flow diagram for alternative 1 is illustrated in Fig. 7.9.
1,70,000 1,70,000 1,70,000 1,70,000 1,70,000
The formulae for the net present worth of alternative 1 are as follows:
PW 1(i) = –5,00,000 + 1,70,000(P/A, i, 5)
PW 1(15%) = –5,00,000 + 1,70,000(P/A, 15%, 5)
PW 1(17%) = –5,00,000 + 1,70,000(P/A, 17%, 5)
PW 1(20%) = –5,00,000 + 1,70,000(P/A, 20%, 5)
PW 1(22%) = –5,00,000 + 1,70,000(P/A, 22%, 5)
Therefore, the rate of return of alternative 1 is
Initial outlay = Rs. 8,00,000
Annual revenue = Rs. 2,70,000
The cash flow diagram for alternative 2 is depicted in Fig. 7.10.
2,70,000 2,70,000 2,70,000 2,70,000 2,70,000
The formula for the net present worth of alternative 2 is:
PW 2(i) = – 8,00,000 + 2,70,000(P/A, i, 5)
PW 2(20%) = – 8,00,000 + 2,70,000(P/A, 20%, 5)
PW 2(22%) = –8,00,000 + 2,70,000(P/A, 22%, 5)
Thus, the rate of return of alternative 2 is
Since the rate of return of alternative 1 is greater than that of the alternative 2,
1. Consider the following cash flow of a project:
Year
Find the rate of return of the project.
2. A person invests a sum of Rs. 2,00,000 in a business and receives equal net
revenue of Rs. 50,000 for the next 10 years. At the end of the 10 th year, the
salvage value of the business is Rs. 25,000. Find the rate of return of the
business.
3. A company is in the process of selecting the best alternative among the
following three mutually exclusive alternatives:
Find the best alternative based on the rate of return method of comparison.
4. A shipping firm is considering the purchase of a materials handling system
for unloading ships at a dock. The firm has reduced their choice to three
different systems, all of which are expected to provide the same unloading
speed. The initial costs and the operating costs estimated for each system
are now tabulated.
System
Annual operating expenses
The life of each system is estimated to be five years and the firm’s
minimum attractive rate of return is 15%. If the firm must select one of the
materials handling systems, which one is the most desirable?.
5. A firm has identified three mutually exclusive alternatives. The life of all
three alternatives is estimated to be five years. The minimum attractive rate
of return is 12%. Find the best alternative based on the rate of return
method.
Initial investment (Rs.)
6. An automobile company is planning to buy a robot for its forging unit. It
has identified two different companies for the supply of the robot. The
details of cost and incremental revenue of using robots are summarized in
the following table:
Speedex
Giant
Annual incremental revenue (Rs.)
Life-end salvage value (Rs.)
The minimum attractive return for the company is 12%. Suggest the best
brand of robot to the company based on the rate of return method.
7. A bank introduces two different investment schemes whose details are as
follows: Find the best investment alternative from the investor’s point of
view.
Alpha Bank
Beta Bank
Deposit amount (Rs.)
Period of deposit (years)
Maturity amount (Rs.)
8. A company is planning for its expansion programme which will take place
after five years. The expansion requires an equal sum of Rs. 5,00,000 for
consecutive three years. Gamma Bank has recently introduced a scheme in
this line. If the company invests Rs. 7,00,000 now with this bank, it will
make equal repayments of Rs. 5,00,000 for three consecutive years starting
from the end of the fifth year from now. The minimum attractive rate of
return for the company is 12%. Suggest whether the company should invest
with the Gamma Bank for its expansion programme.
9. Consider the following table which summarizes data of two alternatives.
Annual return
Find the best alternative based on the rate of return method of comparison.
10. A company is planning to expand its present business activity. It has two
alternatives for the expansion programme and the corresponding cash flows
are given in the following table. Each alternative has a life of five years and
a negligible salvage value. The minimum attractive rate of return for the
company is 15%. Suggest the best alternative to the company.
Organizations providing goods/services use several facilities like equipment and
machinery which are directly required in their operations. In addition to these
facilities, there are several other items which are necessary to facilitate the
functioning of organizations.
All such facilities should be continuously monitored for their efficient
functioning; otherwise, the quality of service will be poor. Besides the quality
of service of the facilities, the cost of their operation and maintenance would
increase with the passage of time. Hence, it is an absolute necessity to maintain
the equipment in good operating conditions with economical cost. Thus, we
need an integrated approach to minimize the cost of maintenance. In certain
cases, the equipment will be obsolete over a period of time.
If a firm wants to be in the same business competitively, it has to take
decision on whether to replace the old equipment or to retain it by taking the
cost of maintenance and operation into account.
There are two basic reasons for considering the replacement of an
equipment—physical impairment of the various parts or obsolescence of the
Physical impairment refers only to changes in the physical condition of
the machine itself. This would lead to a decline in the value of the service
rendered, increased operating cost, increased maintenance cost or a combination
of these.
Obsolescence is due to improvement of the tools of production, mainly
improvement in technology.
So, it would be uneconomical to continue production with the same
machine under any of the above situations. Hence, the machines are to be
periodically replaced.
Sometimes, the capacity of existing facilities may be inadequate to meet the
current demand. Under such situation, the following alternatives will be
considered.
 Replacement of the existing equipment with a new one.
 Augmenting the existing one with an additional equipment.
Maintenance activity can be classified into two types: preventive maintenance
and breakdown maintenance. Preventive maintenance (PM) is the periodical
inspection and service activities which are aimed to detect potential failures and
perform minor adjustments or repairs which will prevent major operating
problems in future. Breakdown maintenance is the repair which is generally
done after the equipment has attained down state. It is often of an emergency
nature which will have associated penalty in terms of expediting cost of
maintenance and down time cost of equipment. Preventive maintenance will
reduce such cost up to a point. Beyond that point, the cost of preventive
maintenance will be more when compared to the breakdown maintenance cost.
The total cost, which is the sum of the preventive maintenance cost and the
breakdown maintenance cost, will go on decreasing with an increase in the level
of maintenance up to a point. Beyond that point, the total cost will start
increasing. The level of maintenance corresponding to the minimum total cost
is the optimal level of maintenance. The concepts are demonstrated in Fig. 8.1.
Level of maintenance activity
Preventive
maintenance
Breakdown
Total cost
Costs
Maintenance costs.
TYPES OF REPLACEMENT PROBLEM
Replacement study can be classified into two categories:
(a) Replacement of assets that deteriorate with time (Replacement due to
gradual failure, or wear and tear of the components of the machines).
This can be further classified into the following types:
(i) Determination of economic life of an asset.
(ii) Replacement of an existing asset with a new asset.
(b) Simple probabilistic model for assets which fail completely (replacement
due to sudden failure).
DETERMINATION OF ECONOMIC LIFE OF AN ASSET
Any asset will have the following cost components:
 Capital recovery cost (average first cost), computed from the first cost
(purchase price) of the machine.
 Average operating and maintenance cost (O & M cost)
 Total cost which is the sum of capital recovery cost (average first cost)
and average maintenance cost.
A typical shape of each of the above costs with respect to life of the
machine is shown in Fig. 8.2.
Chart showing economic life.
Capital
recovery
Economic life
Average operating and
From Fig. 8.2, it is clear that the capital recovery cost (average first cost)
goes on decreasing with the life of the machine and the average operating and
maintenance cost goes on increasing with the life of the machine. From the
beginning, the total cost continues to decrease up to a particular life and then
it starts increasing. The point where the total cost is minimum is called the
economic life of the machine.
If the interest rate is more than zero per cent, then we use interest formulas
to determine the economic life.
The replacement alternatives can be evaluated based on the present worth
criterion and annual equivalent criterion. The basics of these criteria are already
presented in Chapter 3.
A firm is considering replacement of an equipment, whose
first cost is Rs. 4,000 and the scrap value is negligible at the end of any year.
Based on experience, it was found that the maintenance cost is zero during the
first year and it increases by Rs. 200 every year thereafter.
(a) When should the equipment be replaced if i = 0%?
(b) When should the equipment be replaced if i = 12%?
(a) When i = 0%. In this problem,
(i) First cost = Rs. 4,000
(ii) Maintenance cost is Rs. 0 during the first year and it increases
by Rs. 200 every year thereafter.
This is summarized in column B of Table 8.1.
Calculations to Determine Economic Life (First cost = Rs. 4,000, Interest = 0%)
End of
Summation of
Average cost of
Average first
Average total
cost at end
cost if replaced
cost through
through year
at year end
year given
given
*Economic life of the machine = 6 years
Column C summarizes the summation of maintenance costs for each
replacement period. The value corresponding to any end of year in this column
represents the total maintenance cost of using the equipment till the end of that
particular year.
Average total cost = First cost (FC) + Summation of maintenance cost
Replacement period
n + Column C
= Average first cost for
the given period
Average maintenance cost
for the given period
Column F = Column E + Column D
The value corresponding to any end of year (n) in Column F represents the
average total cost of using the equipment till the end of that particular year.
For this problem, the average total cost decreases till the end of year 6 and
then it increases. Therefore, the optimal replacement period is six years, i. e.
economic life of the equipment is six years.
(b) When interest rate, i = 12%. When the interest rate is more than 0%,
the steps to be taken for getting the economic life are summarized with
reference to Table 8.2.
Calculations to Determine Economic Life (First cost = Rs. 4,000,
End of Maintenance
Summation of Present worth
as of beginning
of cumulative
of year 1 of
of maintenance maintenance
costs through
cost & first
E + Rs. 4,000
*Economic life of the machine = 7 years
The steps are summarized now:
1. Discount the maintenance costs to the beginning of year 1.
Column D = Column B 
+ i n
= Column B  (P/F, i, n) = Column B  Column C.
2. Find the summation of present worth of maintenance costs through the
year given (Column E = Column D).
3. Find Column F by adding the first cost of Rs. 4,000 to Column E.
4. Find the annual equivalent total cost through the years given.
Column H = Column F 
= Column F  (A/P, 12%, n) = Column F  Column G
5. Identify the end of year for which the annual equivalent total cost is
minimum.
For this problem, the annual equivalent total cost is minimum at the end of
year 7. Therefore, the economic life of the equipment is seven years.
The following table gives the operation cost, maintenance cost
and salvage value at the end of every year of a machine whose purchase value
Find the economic life of the machine assuming interest rate, i = 15%.
Operation cost
at the end of
cost at the
year (Rs.)
end of year (Rs.)
First cost = Rs. 20,000
Interest rate = 15%
The other details are summarized in Table 8.3 along with regular
calculations for determining the economic life.
Calculations to Determine Economic Life
(First Cost = Rs. 20,000, Interest Rate = 15%)
Maintenance Sum of operation
Cumulative
cost at
and maintenance
sum of
value at
equlant.
the end
costs at the end
P/F, 15%, of year 1 of sum column F
as of
of operation & through year
beginning
maintenance cost designated
through
of salvage
value
G + 20,000 – I
*Economic Life = 5 years
Total annual equivalent cost
i. e. Column L = (Column G + 20,000 – Column I)  Column K
= Column J  Column K
In Column L, the annual equivalent total cost is minimum for n = 5. Therefore,
the economic life of the machine is five years.
A company has already identified machine A and determined
the economic life as four years by assuming 15% interest rate. The annual
equivalent total cost corresponding to the economic life is Rs. 2,780.
Now, the manufacturer of machine B has approached the company.
Machine B, which has the same capacity as that of machine A, is priced at
Rs. 6,000. The maintenance cost of machine B is estimated at Rs. 1,500 for the
first year and an equal yearly increment of Rs. 300 thereafter.
If the money is worth 15% per year, which machine should be purchased?
(Assume that the scrap value of each of the machines is negligible at any year.)
Determination of economic life and corresponding annual equivalent total cost
of machine B.
The details of machine B are summarized in Table 8.4 along
with the usual calculations to determine the economic life.
Calculations to Determine Economic Life (First Cost = Rs. 6,000, Interest = 15%)
Column E
cost for end
equivalent total
of maintenance
*Economic life of the machine = 8 years
Cumulative sum of
present worth as of
First
beginning of year 1
of operation and
maintenance costs
Column B of Table 8.4 summarizes the yearly maintenance costs of
machine B. The first cost of machine B is equal to Rs. 6,000.
Annual equivalent total cost
= (Column E + Rs. 6,000)  Column G
= Column F  Column G
In Column H, the minimum annual equivalent total cost occurs when n
is equal to 8. Hence the economic life of machine B is 8 years and the
corresponding annual equivalent total cost is Rs. 3,672.30.
Minimum annual equivalent total cost for machine A = Rs. 2,780
Minimum annual equivalent total cost for machine B = Rs. 3,672.30
Since the minimum annual equivalent total cost of machine A is less than
that of machine B, machine A is selected as the best machine which has the
economic life of four years. (Note: Selection of the best machine is based on the
minimum annual equivalent total cost. The comparison is made over the
minimum common multiple of the lives of machine A and machine B, i. e.
REPLACEMENT OF EXISTING ASSET WITH A
In this section, the concept of comparison of replacement of an existing asset
with a new asset is presented. In this analysis, the annual equivalent cost of each
alternative should be computed first. Then the alternative which has the least
cost should be selected as the best alternative. Before discussing details, some
preliminary concepts which are essential for this type of replacement analysis
are presented.
Capital Recovery with Return
Consider the following data of a machine. Let
P = purchase price of the machine,
F = salvage value of the machine at the end of machine life,
n = life of the machine in years, and
i = interest rate, compounded annually
The corresponding cash flow diagram is shown in Fig. 8.3.
of maintenance cost through
The equation for the annual equivalent amount for the above cash flow
AE(i) = (P – F)  (A/P, i, n) + F  i
This equation represents the capital recovery with return.
Concept of Challenger and Defender
If an existing equipment is considered for replacement with a new equipment,
then the existing equipment is known as the defender and the new equipment is
known as challenger.
Assume that an equipment has been purchased about three years back for
Rs. 5,00,000 and it is considered for replacement with a new equipment. The
supplier of the new equipment will take the old one for some money, say,
Rs. 3,00,000. This should be treated as the present value of the existing
equipment and it should be considered for all further economic analysis. The
purchase value of the existing equipment before three years is now known as
sunk cost, and it should not be considered for further analysis.
Two years ago, a machine was purchased at a cost of
Rs. 2,00,000 to be useful for eight years. Its salvage value at the end of its life
is Rs. 25,000. The annual maintenance cost is Rs. 25,000. The market value of
the present machine is Rs. 1,20,000. Now, a new machine to cater to the need
of the present machine is available at Rs. 1,50,000 to be useful for six years. Its
annual maintenance cost is Rs. 14,000. The salvage value of the new machine
is Rs. 20,000. Using an interest rate of 12%, find whether it is worth replacing
the present machine with the new machine.
Purchase price = Rs. 2,00,000
Present value (P) = Rs. 1,20,000
Salvage value (F) = Rs. 25,000
Annual maintenance cost (A) = Rs. 25,000
Remaining life = 6 years
Interest rate = 12%
The cash flow diagram of the present machine is illustrated in Fig. 8.4. The
Cash flow diagram of machine.
annual maintenance cost for the preceding periods are not shown in this figure.
The annual equivalent cost is computed as
AE(12%) = (P – F)(A/P, 12%, 6) + F  i + A
= (1,20,000 – 25,000)(0.2432) + 25,000  0.12 + 25,000
Purchase price (P) = Rs. 1,50,000
Salvage value (F) = Rs. 20,000
Annual maintenance cost (A) = Rs. 14,000
Life = 6 years
The cash flow diagram of the new machine is depicted in Fig. 8.5.
25,000 25,000 25,000 25,000 25,000
The formula for the annual equivalent cost is
AE(12%) = (P – F)(A/P, 12%, 6) + F  i + A
= (1,50,000 – 20,000)(0.2432) + 20,000  0.12 + 14,000
Since the annual equivalent cost of the new machine is less than that of the
present machine, it is suggested that the present machine be replaced with the
new machine.
A diesel engine was installed 10 years ago at a cost of
Rs. 50,000. It has a present realizable market value of Rs. 15,000. If kept, it can
be expected to last five years more, with operating and maintenance cost of
Rs. 14,000 per year and to have a salvage value of Rs. 8,000 at the end of the
fifth year. This engine can be replaced with an improved version costing
Rs. 65,000 which has an expected life of 20 years. This improved version will
have an estimated annual operating and maintenance cost of Rs. 9,000 and
ultimate salvage value of Rs. 13,000. Using an interest rate of 15%, make an
annual equivalent cost analysis to determine whether to keep or replace the old
engine.
Alternative 1—Old diesel engine
Purchase price = Rs. 50,000
Present value (P) = Rs. 15,000
Salvage value (F) = Rs. 8,000
Annual operating and maintenance cost (A) = Rs. 14,000
Remaining life (n) = 5 years
The cash flow diagram of the old diesel engine is shown in Fig. 8.6.
AE(15%) = (P – F)(A/P, 15%, 5) + F  i + A
= (15,000 – 8,000)(0.2983) + 8,000  0.15 + 14,000
Alternative 2—New diesel engine
Present value (P) = Rs. 65,000
Salvage value (F) = Rs. 13,000
Annual operating and maintenance cost (A) = Rs. 9,000
Life (n) = 20 years
The cash flow diagram of the new diesel engine is shown in Fig. 8.7.
AE(15%) = (P – F)(A/P, 15%, 20) + F  i + A
= (65,000 – 13,000)(0.1598) + 13,000  0.15 + 9,000
For comparing the engines based on equal lives (20 years), the annual
equivalent figures are given in Fig. 8.8. Equal lives are nothing but the least
common multiple of the lives of the alternatives.
Old engine
New engine
Cash flow diagram of alternatives based on common lives.
Since the annual equivalent cost of the old diesel engine is less than that of the
new diesel engine, it is suggested to keep the old diesel engine. Here, an
important assumption is that the old engine will be replaced four times during
the 20 years period of comparison.
A steel highway bridge must either be reinforced or replaced.
Reinforcement would cost Rs. 6,60,000 and would make the bridge fit for an
additional five years of service. If it is reinforced, it is estimated that its net
salvage value would be Rs. 4,00,000 at the time it is retired from service. The
new prestressed concrete bridge would cost Rs. 15,00,000 and would meet the
foreseeable requirements of the next 40 years. Such a bridge would have no
salvage value. It is estimated that the annual maintenance cost of the reinforced
bridge would exceed that of the concrete bridge by Rs. 96,000. If the bridge is
replaced by a new prestressed concrete bridge, the scrap value of the steel would
exceed the demolition cost by Rs. 4,20,000. Assume that the money costs the
state 10%. What would you recommend?
There are two alternatives:
1. Reinforce the existing bridge.
2. Replace the existing bridge by a new prestressed concrete bridge.
Alternative 1—Reinforce the existing bridge
Cost of reinforcement (P) = Rs. 6,60,000
Salvage value after 5 years (F) = Rs. 4,00,000
The excess annual maintenance cost over prestressed concrete bridge (A)
Life (n) = 5 years
Interest rate (i) = 10%
The cash flow diagram of alternative 1 is illustrated in Fig. 8.9.
The annual equivalent cost of the alternative 1 is computed as
AE(10%) = (P – F)(A/P, 10%, 5) + F  i + A
= (6,60,000 – 4,00,000)(0.2638) + 4,00,000  0.10 + 96,000
Alternative 2—Replace the existing bridge by a new prestressed concrete
bridge
Cost of prestressed concrete bridge (P) = Rs. 15,00,000
Excess scrap value of steel over the demolition cost of the current bridge
Life (n) = 40 years
Note that the excess maintenance cost of the reinforced bridge over the
prestressed concrete bridge is included in alternative 1.
The cash flow diagram for alternative 2 is shown in Fig. 8.10.
The annual equivalent cost of alternative 2 is calculated as
AE(10%) = (P – X) (A/P, 10%, 40)
= (15,00,000 – 4,20,000)  0.1023
The annual equivalent cost of alternative 2 is less than that of alternative 1.
Based on equal lives comparison over 40 years, alternative 2 is selected as the
best alternative.
Thus, it is suggested to go in for prestressed concrete bridge.
Three years back, a municipality purchased a 10 hp motor for
pumping drinking water. Its useful life was estimated to be 10 years. Due to the
fast development of that locality, the municipality is unable to meet the current
demand for water with the existing motor. The municipality can cope with the
situation either by augmenting an additional 5 hp motor or replacing the existing
10 hp motor with a new 15 hp motor. The details of these motors are now
tabulated.
motor
Purchase cost (P) Rs.
Life in years (n)
Salvage value at the end of
machine life (Rs.)
Annual operating & maintenance
The current market value of the 10 hp motor is Rs. 10,000. Using an interest
rate of 15%, find the best alternative.
There are two alternatives to cope with the situation:
1. Augmenting the present 10 hp motor with an additional 5 hp motor.
2. Replacing the present 10 hp motor with a new 15 hp motor.
Alternative 1—Augmenting the present 10 hp motor with an additional
Total annual equivalent cost = Annual equivalent cost of 10 hp motor +
Annual equivalent cost of 5 hp motor
Calculation of annual equivalent cost of 10 hp Motor
Present market value of the 10 hp motor (P) = Rs. 10,000
Remaining life (n) = 7 years
Salvage value at the end of motor life (F) = Rs. 1,500
Annual operation and maintenance cost (A) = Rs. 1,600
Interest rate, i = 15%
The cash flow diagram of this alternative is shown in Fig. 8.11.
The annual equivalent cost of the 10 hp motor is calculated as
AE(15%) = (P – F)(A/P, 15%, 7) + F  i + A
= (10,000 – 1,500)(0.2404) + 1,500  0.15 + 1,600
Calculation of annual equivalent cost of 5 hp motor
Purchase value of the 5 hp motor (P) = Rs. 10,000
Life (n) = 7 years
Salvage value at the end of motor life (F) = Rs. 800
Annual operation and maintenance cost (A) = Rs. 1,000
The cash flow diagram of the 5 hp motor is illustrated in Fig. 8.12.
Cash flow diagram for 10 hp motor.
The annual equivalent cost of the 5 hp motor is computed as
AE(15%) = (P – F)(A/P, 15%, 7) + F  i + A
= (10,000 – 800)(0.2404) + 800  0.15 + 1,000
Total annual equivalent cost of the alternative 1 = Rs. 3,868.40
Alternative 2—Replacing the present 10 hp motor with a new 15 hp motor
Purchase value of the 15 hp motor (P) = Rs. 35,000
Salvage value at the end of motor life (F) = Rs. 4,000
Annual operation and maintenance cost (A) = Rs. 500
The cash flow diagram of this alternative is shown in Fig. 8.13.
Cash flow diagram for 5 hp motor.
The annual equivalent cost of alternative 2 is
AE(15%) = (P – F) (A/P, 15%, 7) + F  i + A
= (35,000 – 4,000)(0.2404) + 4,000  0.15 + 500
The total annual equivalent cost of alternative 1 is less than that of alternative
2. Therefore, it is suggested that the present 10 hp motor be augmented with a
new 5 hp motor.
A machine was purchased two years ago for Rs. 10,000. Its
annual maintenance cost is Rs. 750. Its life is six years and its salvage value at
the end of its life is Rs. 1,000. Now, a company is offering a new machine at
a cost of Rs. 10,000. Its life is four years and its salvage value at the end of its
life is Rs. 4,000. The annual maintenance cost of the new machine is Rs. 500.
The company which is supplying the new machine is willing to take the old
machine for Rs. 8,000 if it is replaced by the new machine. Assume an interest
rate of 12%, compounded annually.
(a) Find the comparative use value of the old machine.
(b) Is it advisable to replace the old machine?
Solution Old machine Let the comparative use value of the old machine be X.
Remaining life (n) = 4 years.
Salvage value of the old machine (F) = Rs. 1,000
Annual maintenance cost (A) = Rs. 750
Interest rate, i = 12%
The cash flow diagram of the old machine is depicted in Fig. 8.14.
The annual equivalent cost of the old machine is computed as
AE(12%) = (X – F)(A/P, 12%, 4) + F  i + A
= (X – 1,000)(0.3292) + 1,000  0.12 + 750
New machine
Cost of the new Machine (P) = Rs. 10,000
Life (n) = 4 years.
Salvage value of the new machine (F) = Rs. 4,000
Annual Maintenance cost (A) = Rs. 500
The cash flow diagram of the new machine is illustrated in Fig. 8.15.
Cash flow diagram for old machine.
The annual equivalent cost of the new machine is illustrated as
AE(12%) = (P – F) (A/P, 12%, 4) + F  i + A
= (10,000 – 4,000)(0.3292) + 4,000  0.12 + 500
Now, equate the annual equivalent costs of the two alternatives and solve
for X.
(X – 1,000)(0.3292) + 1,000  0.12 + 750 = 2,955.20
X = Rs. 7,334.14
The comparative use value of the old machine is Rs. 7,334.14, which is less
than the price (Rs. 8,000) offered by the company which is supplying the new
machine in the event of replacing the old machine by the new machine.
Therefore, it is advisable to replace the old machine with the new one.
SIMPLE PROBABILISTIC MODEL FOR ITEMS
Electronic items like transistors, resistors, tubelights, bulbs, etc. could fail all of
a sudden, instead of gradual deterioration. The failure of the item may result in
complete breakdown of the system. The system may contain a collection of such
items or just one item, say a tubelight. Therefore, we use some replacement
policy for such items which would avoid the possibility of a complete
breakdown.
The following are the replacement policies which are applicable for this
situation.
(i) Individual replacement policy.
Under this policy, an item is replaced
immediately after its failure.
(ii) Group replacement policy.
Under this policy, the following decision
is made:
At what equal intervals are all the items to be replaced simultaneously with
a provision to replace the items individually which fail during a fixed group
replacement period?
Cash flow diagram for new machine.
There is a trade-off between the individual replacement policy and the
group replacement policy. Hence, for a given problem, each of the replacement
policies is evaluated and the most economical policy is selected for
implementation. This is explained with two numerical problems.
The failure rates of transistors in a computer are summarized
Failure Rates of Transistors in Computers
End of week
Probability of
failure to date
The cost of replacing an individual failed transistor is Rs. 9. If all the
transistors are replaced simultaneously, it would cost Rs. 3.00 per transistor.
Any one of the following two options can be followed to replace the transistors:
(a) Replace the transistors individually when they fail (individual
replacement policy).
(b) Replace all the transistors simultaneously at fixed intervals and replace
the individual transistors as they fail in service during the fixed interval
(group replacement policy).
Find out the optimal replacement policy, i. e. individual replacement policy
or group replacement policy. If group replacement policy is optimal, then find
at what equal intervals should all the transistors be replaced.
Assume that there are 100 transistors in use.
Let, pi be the probability that a transistor which was new when placed in
position for use, fails during the ith week of its life. Hence,
Since the sum of pis is equal to 1 at the end of the 7 th week, the transistors
are sure to fail during the seventh week.
Assume that
(a) transistors that fail during a week are replaced just before the end of the
week, and
(b) the actual percentage of failures during a week for a sub-group of
transistors with the same age is same as the expected percentage of
failures during the week for that sub-group of transistors.
Let
Ni = the number of transistors replaced at the end of the ith week
N 0 = number of transistors replaced at the end of the week 0 (or at the
beginning of the first week).
N 1 = number of transistors replaced at the end of the 1 st week
= N 0  p 1 = 100  0.07 = 7
N 2 = number of transistors replaced at the end of the 2 nd week
= N 0  p 2 + N 1  p 1
= 100  0.11 + 7  0.07 = 12
N 3 = N 0  p 3 + N 1  p 2 + N 2  p 1
= 100  0.12 + 7  0.11 + 12  0.07
N 4 = N 0  p 4 + N 1  p 3 + N 2  p 2 + N 3  p 1
= 100  0.18 + 7  0.12 + 12  0.11 + 14  0.07
N 5 = N 0  p 5 + N 1  p 4 + N 2  p 3 + N 3  p 2 + N 4  p 1
= 100  0.21 + 7  0.18 + 12  0.12 + 14  0.11 + 21  0.07
N 6 = N 0  p 6 + N 1  p 5 + N 2  p 4 + N 3  p 3 + N 4  p 2 + N 5  p 1
= 100  0.2 + 7  0.21 + 12  0.18 + 14  0.12 + 21  0.11 + 27  0.07
N 7 = N 0  p 7 + N 1  p 6 + N 2  p 5 + N 3  p 4 + N 4  p 3 + N 5  p 2
+ N 6  p 1
= 100  0.11 + 7  0.2 + 12  0.21 + 14  0.18 + 21  0.12
+ 27  0.11 + 30  0.07
Calculation of individual replacement cost
Expected life of each transistor =
i  pi
= 1  0.07 + 2  0.11 + 3  0.12 + 4  0.18
+ 5  0.21 + 6  0.2 + 7  0.11
Average No. of failures/week = 100/4.39 = 23 (approx.)
Cost of individual replacement
= (No. of failures/week  Individual replacement cost/transistor)
= 23  9 = Rs. 207.
Determination of group replacement cost
Cost of transistor when replaced simultaneously = Rs. 3
Cost of transistor when replaced individually = Rs. 9
The costs of group replacement policy for several replacement periods are
summarized in Table 8.6.
Calculations of Cost for Preventive Maintenance
Cost of replacing
Cost of replacing transistors
Average
week
individually during given
cost/week
at a time
7  9 = 63
(7 + 12)  9 = 171
(7 + 12 + 14)  9 = 297
(7 + 12 + 14 + 21)  9 = 486
(7 + 12 + 14 + 21 + 27)  9 = 729
(7 + 12 + 14 + 21 + 27 + 30)  9 = 999
(7 + 12 + 14 + 21 + 27 + 30 + 25)  9 = 1,224
*Indicates the minimum average cost/week.
From Table 8.6, it is clear that the average cost/week is minimum for the
fourth week. Hence, the group replacement period is four weeks.
Individual replacement cost/week = Rs. 207
Minimum group replacement cost/week = Rs. 196.50
Since the minimum group replacement cost/week is less than the individual
replacement cost/week, the group replacement policy is the best, and hence all
the transistors should be replaced once in four weeks and the transistors which
fail during this four-week period are to be replaced individually.
An electronic equipment contains 1,000 resistors. When any
resistor fails, it is replaced. The cost of replacing a resistor individually is
Rs. 10. If all the resistors are replaced at the same time, the cost per resistor is
Rs. 4. The per cent surviving, S(i) at the end of month i is tabulated as follows:
What is the optimum replacement plan?
Let pi be the probability of failure during the month i. Then,
p 1 = (100 – 96)/100 = 0.04
p 4 = (68 – 37)/100 = 0.31
p 2 = (96 – 89)/100 = 0.07
p 5 = (37 – 13)/100 = 0.24
p 3 = (89 – 68)/100 = 0.21
p 6 = (13 – 0)/100 = 0.13
It is clear that no resistor can survive beyond six months. Hence, a resistor
which has survived for five months would certainly fail during the sixth month.
We assume that the resistors failing during a month are accounted at the end of
the month.
Ni = No. of resistors replaced at the end of the ith month.
N 1 = N 0 p 1 = 1,000  0.04 = 40
N 2 = N 0 p 2 + N 1 p 1 = 1,000  0.07 + 40  0.04 = 72
N 3 = N 0 p 3 + N 1 p 2 + N 2 p 1 = 1,000  0.21 + 40  0.07
+ 72  0.04 = 216
N 4 = N 0 p 4 + N 1 p 3 + N 2 p 2 + N 3 p 1
= 1,000  0.31 + 40  0.21 + 72  0.07 + 216  0.04 = 332
N 5 = N 0 p 5 + N 1 p 4 + N 2 p 3 + N 3 p 2 + N 4 p 1
= 1,000  0.24 + 40  0.31 + 72  0.21 + 216  0.07
+ 332  0.04 = 296
N 6 = N 0 p 6 + N 1 p 5 + N 2 p 4 + N 3 p 3 + N 4 p 2 + N 5 p 1
= 1,000  0.13 + 40  0.24 + 72  0.31 + 216  0.21 + 332  0.07
+ 296  0.04
Determination of individual replacement cost
Expected life of each resistor =
= 1  0.04 + 2  0.07 + 3  0.21 + 4  0.31
+ 5  0.24 + 6  0.13
Average number of failures/month = 1,000/4.03 = 248 (approx.)
= (No. of failures/month  individual replacement cost/resistor)
= 248  10 = Rs. 2,480.
Cost/resistor when replaced simultaneously = Rs. 4.00
Cost/resistor when replaced individually = Rs. 10.00
The costs of group replacement policy for several replacement periods are
summarized in Table 8.7.
Calculations of Costs for Preventive Maintenance
Cost of replacing resistors
Average cost/
month
month (D/A)
a time
40  10 = 400
(40 + 72)10 = 1,120
(40 + 72 + 216)10 = 3,280
(40 + 72 + 216 + 332)10 = 6,600
*Indicates the minimum average cost/month.
From Table 8.7, it is clear that the average cost/month is minimum for the
third month. Thus, the group replacement period is three months.
Summary
Individual replacement cost/month = Rs. 2,480.00
Minimum group replacement cost/month = Rs. 2,426.67
Since the minimum group replacement cost/month is less than the
individual replacement cost/month, the group replacement policy is the best and
hence all the resistors are to be replaced once in three months and the resistors
which fail during this three months period are to be replaced individually.
1. List and explain the different types of maintenance.
2. Discuss the reasons for replacement.
3. Define ‘economic life’ of an equipment.
4. Distinguish between breakdown maintenance and preventive maintenance.
5. A firm is considering replacement of an equipment, whose first cost is
Rs. 1,750 and the scrap value is negligible at any year. Based on experience,
it was found that the maintenance cost is zero during the first year and it
increases by Rs. 100 every year thereafter.
(a) When should the equipment be replaced if i = 0%?
(b) When should the equipment be replaced if i = 12%?
6. The following table gives the operation cost, maintenance cost and salvage
value at the end of every year of a machine whose purchase value is
(a) Find the economic life of the machine assuming interest rate (i) of 0%
(b) Find the economic life of the machine assuming interest rate of 15%.
End of year (n)
7. A manufacturer is offered two machines A and B. A is priced at Rs. 8,000
and maintenance costs are estimated at Rs. 500 for the first year and an
equal increment of Rs. 100 from year 2 to year 5, and Rs. 1,500 for the
sixth year and an equal increment of Rs. 500 from year 7 onwards.
Machine B which has the same capacity is priced at Rs. 6,000. The
maintenance costs of the machine B are estimated at Rs. 1,000 for the first
year and an equal yearly increment of Rs. 200 thereafter.
If the money is worth 15% per year, which machine should be
purchased? (Assume that the scrap value of each of the machines is
negligible at any year.)
8. Three years back, a machine was purchased at a cost of Rs. 3,00,000 to be
useful for 10 years. Its salvage value at the end of its estimated life is Rs.
50,000. Its annual maintenance cost is Rs. 40,000. The market value of the
present machine is Rs. 2,00,000. A new machine to cater to the need of the
present machine is available at Rs. 2,50,000 to be useful for 7 years. Its
annual maintenance cost is Rs. 14,000. The salvage value of the new
machine is Rs. 20,000. Using an interest rate of 15%, find whether it is
worth replacing the present machine with the new one.
9. A steel highway bridge must either be reinforced or replaced.
Reinforcement would cost Rs. 8,60,000 and would make the bridge
adequate for an additional seven years of service. If it is reinforced, it is
estimated that its net salvage value would be Rs. 5,00,000 at the time it is
retired from service. The new prestressed concrete bridge would cost
Rs. 18,00,000 and would meet the foreseeable requirements of the next
35 years. Such a bridge would have no salvage value. It is estimated that
the annual maintenance cost of the reinforced bridge would exceed that
of the concrete bridge by Rs. 1,00,000. If the bridge is replaced by a new
prestressed concrete bridge, the scrap value of the steel would exceed the
demolition cost by Rs. 5,20,000. Assume that the money costs the state
12%. What would you recommend?
10. Three years back, a municipality purchased a 10 hp motor for pumping
drinking water. Its useful life was estimated to be 10 years. Its annual
operation and maintenance cost is Rs. 1,500. Due to rapid development of
that locality, the municipality is unable to meet the current demand for
water with the existing motor. The municipality can cope with the situation
either by augmenting an additional 5 hp motor or replacing the existing
10 hp motor with a new 15 hp motor. The details of these motors are given
in the following table.
Salvage value at the
end of machine life (Rs.)
Annual operating &
The current market value of the 10 hp motor is Rs. 10,000. Using an
interest rate of 18% find the best alternative.
11. The failure rates of transistors in a computer are summarized in the
following table.
The cost of replacing an individual failed transistor is Rs. 8. If all the
transistors are replaced simultaneously, it would cost Rs. 4 per transistor.
Any one of the following two options can be followed to replace the
transistors:
(b) Replace all the transistors simultaneously at fixed intervals and replace
the individual transistors as they fail in service during the fixed interval
Find out which is the optimal replacement policy, i. e. the individual
replacement policy or the group replacement policy. If the group
replacement policy is optimal, then find at what equal intervals should all
the transistors be replaced.
12. An electronic equipment contains 1,000 resistors. When any resistor fails,
it is replaced. The cost of replacing a resistor individually is Rs. 7. If all the
resistors are replaced at the same time, the cost per resistor is Rs. 4. The per
cent surviving, S(i) at the end of month i is tabulated now.
Any equipment which is purchased today will not work for ever. This may be
due to wear and tear of the equipment or obsolescence of technology. Hence, it
is to be replaced at the proper time for continuance of any business. The
replacement of the equipment at the end of its life involves money. This must
be internally generated from the earnings of the equipment. The recovery of
money from the earnings of an equipment for its replacement purpose is called
depreciation fund since we make an assumption that the value of the equipment
decreases with the passage of time. Thus, the word “depreciation” means
decrease in value of any physical asset with the passage of time.
There are several methods of accounting depreciation fund. These are as
1. Straight line method of depreciation
2. Declining balance method of depreciation
3. Sum of the years—digits method of depreciation
4. Sinking-fund method of depreciation
5. Service output method of depreciation
These are now discussed in detail.
Straight Line Method of Depreciation
In this method of depreciation, a fixed sum is charged as the depreciation
amount throughout the lifetime of an asset such that the accumulated sum at the
end of the life of the asset is exactly equal to the purchase value of the asset.
Here, we make an important assumption that inflation is absent.
P = first cost of the asset,
F = salvage value of the asset,
Depreciation
n = life of the asset,
Bt = book value of the asset at the end of the period t,
Dt = depreciation amount for the period t.
The formulae for depreciation and book value are as follows:
Bt = Bt–1 – Dt = P – t  [(P – F)/n]
A company has purchased an equipment whose first cost is
Rs. 1,00,000 with an estimated life of eight years. The estimated salvage value
of the equipment at the end of its lifetime is Rs. 20,000. Determine the
depreciation charge and book value at the end of various years using the straight
line method of depreciation.
P = Rs. 1,00,000
F = Rs. 20,000
n = 8 years
In this method of depreciation, the value of Dt is the same for all the years.
The calculations pertaining to Bt for different values of t are summarized in
Dt and Bt Values under Straight line Method of Depreciation
Book value
If we are interested in computing Dt and Bt for a specific period (t), the
formulae can be used. In this approach, it should be noted that the depreciation
is the same for all the periods.
Consider Example 9.1 and compute the depreciation and the
book value for period 5.
= Rs. 10,000 (This is independent of the time period.)
Bt = P – t  (P – F)/n
B 5 = 1,00,000 – 5  (1,00,000 – 20,000)/8
Declining Balance Method of Depreciation
In this method of depreciation, a constant percentage of the book value of the
previous period of the asset will be charged as the depreciation amount for the
current period. This approach is a more realistic approach, since the depreciation
charge decreases with the life of the asset which matches with the earning
potential of the asset. The book value at the end of the life of the asset may not
be exactly equal to the salvage value of the asset. This is a major limitation of
this approach.
Bt = book value of the asset at the end of the period t,
K = a fixed percentage, and
Dt = depreciation amount at the end of the period t.
Dt = K  Bt-1
Bt = Bt–1 – Dt = Bt–1 – K  Bt–1
= (1 – K)  Bt–1
The formulae for depreciation and book value in terms of P are as follows:
Dt = K(1 – K)t–1  P
Bt = (1 – K)t  P
While availing income-tax exception for the depreciation amount paid in
each year, the rate K is limited to at the most 2/n. If this rate is used, then the
corresponding approach is called the double declining balance method of
depreciation.
Consider Example 9.1 and demonstrate the calculations of the
declining balance method of depreciation by assuming 0.2 for K.
The calculations pertaining to Dt and Bt for different values of t are
summarized in Table 9.2 using the following formulae:
Dt = K  Bt–1
Bt = Bt–1 – Dt
Dt and Bt according to Declining Balance Method of Depreciation
If we are interested in computing Dt and Bt for a specific period t, the
respective formulae can be used.
Consider Example 9.1 and calculate the depreciation and the
book value for period 5 using the declining balance method of depreciation by
assuming 0.2 for K.
D 5 = 0.2(1 – 0.2)4  1,00,000
B 5 = (1 – 0.2)5  1,00,000
Sum-of-the-Years-Digits Method of Depreciation
In this method of depreciation also, it is assumed that the book value of the asset
decreases at a decreasing rate. If the asset has a life of eight years, first the sum
of the years is computed as
Sum of the years = 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 + 8
= 36 = n(n + 1)/2
The rate of depreciation charge for the first year is assumed as the highest and
then it decreases. The rates of depreciation for the years 1–8, respectively are as
follows: 8/36, 7/36, 6/36, 5/36, 4/36, 3/36, 2/36, and 1/36.
For any year, the depreciation is calculated by multiplying the
corresponding rate of depreciation with (P – F).
Dt = Rate  (P – F)
The formulae for Dt and Bt for a specific year t are as follows:
Dt = n + 1
n n
Bt = (P – F) (n
t
sum-of-the-years-digits method of depreciation.
Sum = n(n + 1)/2 = 8  9/2 = 36
The rates for years 1–8, are respectively 8/36, 7/36, 6/36, 5/36, 4/36, 3/36,
The calculations of Dt and Bt for different values of t are summarized in
Table 9.3 using the following formulae:
Dt and Bt under Sum-of-the-years-digits Method of Depreciation
If we are interested in calculating Dt and Bt for a specific t, then the usage
of the formulae would be better.
Consider Example 9.1 and find the depreciation and book
value for the 5 th year using the sum-of-the-years-digits method of depreciation.
Dt = n
D 5 = 8 5 + 1
Bt = (P – F) n
B 5 = (1,00,000 – 20,000) 8 5
8 5 + 1
= 80,000  (3/8)  (4/9) + 20,000
Sinking Fund Method of Depreciation
In this method of depreciation, the book value decreases at increasing rates with
respect to the life of the asset. Let
i = rate of return compounded annually,
A = the annual equivalent amount,
Bt = the book value of the asset at the end of the period t, and
Dt = the depreciation amount at the end of the period t.
The loss in value of the asset (P – F) is made available an the form of
cumulative depreciation amount at the end of the life of the asset by setting up
an equal depreciation amount (A) at the end of each period during the lifetime
of the asset.
A = (P – F)  [A/F, i, n]
The fixed sum depreciated at the end of every time period earns an interest
at the rate of i% compounded annually, and hence the actual depreciation
amount will be in the increasing manner with respect to the time period. A
generalized formula for Dt is
Dt = (P – F)  (A/F, i, n)  (F/P, i, t – 1)
The formula to calculate the book value at the end of period t is
Bt = P – (P – F) (A/F, i, n) (F/A, i, t)
The above two formulae are very useful if we have to calculate Dt and Bt
for any specific period. If we calculate Dt and Bt for all the periods, then the
tabular approach would be better.
Consider Example 9.1 and give the calculations regarding the
sinking fund method of depreciation with an interest rate of 12%, compounded
A = (P – F)  [A/F, 12%, 8]
= (1,00,000 – 20,000)  0.0813
In this method of depreciation, a fixed amount of Rs. 6,504 will be
depreciated at the end of every year from the earning of the asset. The
depreciated amount will earn interest for the remaining period of life of the asset
at an interest rate of 12%, compounded annually. For example, the calculations
of net depreciation for some periods are as follows:
Depreciation at the end of year 1 (D 1) = Rs. 6,504.
Depreciation at the end of year 2 (D 2) = 6,504 + 6,504  0.12
Depreciation at the end of the year 3 (D 3)
= 6,504 + (6,504 + 7,284.48) .12
Depreciation at the end of year 4 (D 4)
= 6,504 + (6,504 + 7,284.48 + 8,158.62)  0.12
These calculations along with book values are summarized in Table 9.4.
Dt and Bt according to Sinking Fund Method of Depreciation
Fixed
Net depreciation
Dt
Bt
Consider Example 9.1 and compute D 5 and B 7 using the
sinking fund method of depreciation with an interest rate of 12%, compounded
Dt = (P – F) (A/F, i, n) (F/P, i, t – 1)
D 5 = (P – F) (A/F, 12%, 8) (F/P, 12%, 4)
= (1,00,000 – 20,000)  0.0813  1.574
This is almost the same as the corresponding value given in the table. The
minor difference is due to truncation error.
Bt = P – (P – F) (A/F, i, n) (F/A, i, t)
B 7 = P – (P – F) (A/F, 12%, 8) (F/A, 12%, 7)
= 1,00,000 – (1,00,000 – 20,000)  0.0813  10.089
Service Output Method of Depreciation
In some situations, it may not be realistic to compute depreciation based on time
period. In such cases, the depreciation is computed based on service rendered
by an asset. Let
P = first cost of the asset
F = salvage value of the asset
X = maximum capacity of service of the asset during its lifetime
x = quantity of service rendered in a period.
Then, the depreciation is defined per unit of service rendered:
Depreciation/unit of service = (P – F)/X
Depreciation for x units of service in a period = P
The first coat of a road laying machine is Rs. 80,00,000. Its
salvage value after five years is Rs. 50,000. The length of road that can be laid
by the machine during its lifetime is 75,000 km. In its third year of operation,
the length of road laid is 2,000 km. Find the depreciation of the equipment for
that year.
P = Rs. 80,00,000
F = Rs. 50,000
X = 75,000 km
x = 2,000 km
Depreciation for x units of service in a period = P
x
Depreciation for year 3 = (
1. Define the following:
(a) Depreciation
(b) Book value
2. Distinguish between declining balance method of depreciation and double
declining balance method of depreciation.
3. The Alpha Drug Company has just purchased a capsulating machine for
Rs. 20,00,000. The plant engineer estimates that the machine has a useful
life of five years and a salvage value of Rs. 25,000 at the end of its useful
life. Compute the depreciation schedule for the machine by each of the
following depreciation methods:
(a) Straight line method of depreciation
(b) Sum-of-the-years digits method of depreciation
(c) Double declining balance method of depreciation
4. A company has recently purchased an overhead travelling crane for
Rs. 25,00,000. Its expected life is seven years and the salvage value at the
end of the life of the overhead travelling crane is Rs. 1,00,000. Using the
straight line method of depreciation, find the depreciation and the book
value at the end of third and fourth year after the crane is purchased.
5. An automobile company has purchased a wheel alignment device for
Rs. 10,00,000. The device can be used for 15 years. The salvage value at
the end of the life of the device is 10% of the purchase value. Find the
following using the double declining balance method of depreciation:
(a) Depreciation at the end of the seventh year
(b) Depreciation at the end of the twelfth year
(c) Book value at the end of the eighth year
6. A company has purchased a bus for its officers for Rs. 10,00,000. The
expected life of the bus is eight years. The salvage value of the bus at the
end of its life is Rs. 1,50,000. Find the following using the sinking fund
method of depreciation:
(a) Depreciation at the end of the third and fifth year
(b) Book value at the end of the second year and sixth year
7. Consider Problem 4 and find the following using the sum-of-the-yearsdigits method of depreciation:
(a) Depreciation at the end of the fourth year
(b) Depreciation at the end of the seventh year
(c) Book value at the end of the fifth year
(d) Book value at the end of the eighth year
8. A company has purchased a Xerox machine for Rs. 2,00,000. The salvage
value of the machine at the end of its useful life would be insignificant. The
maximum number of copies that can be taken during its lifetime is
1,00,00,000. During the fourth year of its operation, the number of copies
taken is 9,00,000. Find the depreciation for the fourth year of operation of
the Xerox machine using the service output method of depreciation.
9. A heavy construction firm has been awarded a contract to build a large
concrete dam. It is expected that a total of eight years will be required to
complete the work. The firm will buy Rs.1,80,00,000 worth of special
equipment for the job. During the preparation of the job cost estimate, the
following utilization schedule was computed for the special equipment:
Hours/yr
At the end of the job, it is estimated that the equipment can be sold at
auction for Rs. 18,00,000.
Prepare the depreciation schedule for all the years of operation of the
equipment using the service output method of depreciation.
In evaluating alternatives of private organizations, the criterion is to select the
alternative with the maximum profit. The profit maximization is the main goal
of private organizations while providing goods/services as per specifications to
their customers. But the same criterion cannot be used while evaluating public
alternatives. Examples of some public alternatives are constructing bridges,
roads, dams, establishing public utilities, etc.
The main objective of any public alternative is to provide goods/services to
the public at the minimum cost. In this process, one should see whether the
benefits of the public activity are at least equal to its costs. If yes, then the public
activity can be undertaken for implementation. Otherwise, it can be cancelled.
This is nothing but taking a decision based on Benefit-Cost ratio (BC) given by
BC ratio = Equivalent benefits
Equivalent costs
The benefits may occur at different time periods of the public activity. For
the purpose of comparison, these are to be converted into a common time base
(present worth or future worth or annual equivalent). Similarly, the costs consist
of initial investment and yearly operation and maintenance cost. These are to be
converted to a common time base as done in the equivalent benefits. Now the
ratio between the equivalent benefits and equivalent costs is known as the
“Benefit-Cost ratio”. If this ratio is at least one, the public activity is justified;
otherwise, it is not justified. Let
BP = present worth of the total benefits
BF = future worth of the total benefits
BA = annual equivalent of the total benefits
P = initial investment
PF = future worth of the initial investment
PA = annual equivalent of the initial investment
C = yearly cost of operation and maintenance
CP = present worth of yearly cost of operation and maintenance
CF = future worth of yearly cost of operation and maintenance
BC ratio =
In a particular locality of a state, the vehicle users take a
roundabout route to reach certain places because of the presence of a river. This
results in excessive travel time and increased fuel cost. So, the state government
is planning to construct a bridge across the river. The estimated initial
investment for constructing the bridge is Rs. 40,00,000. The estimated life of the
bridge is 15 years. The annual operation and maintenance cost is Rs. 1,50,000.
The value of fuel savings due to the construction of the bridge is Rs. 6,00,000
in the first year and it increases by Rs. 50,000 every year thereafter till the end
of the life of the bridge. Check whether the project is justified based on BC ratio
by assuming an interest rate of 12%, compounded annually.
Initial investment = Rs. 40,00,000
Annual operation and maintenance = Rs. 1,50,000
Annual fuel savings during the first year = Rs. 6,00,000
Equal increment in fuel savings in the following years = Rs. 50,000
Life of the project = 15 years
The cash flow diagram of the project is shown in Fig. 10.1.
Cash flow diagram for constructing bridge.
Total present worth of costs = Initial investment (P)
+ Present worth of annual operating
and maintenance cost (CP) = P + CP
= Rs. 40,00,000 + 1,50,000  (P/A, 12%, 15)
= Rs. 40,00,000 + 1,50,000  6.8109
Evaluation of Public Alternatives
Total present worth of fuel savings (BP):
A 1 = Rs. 6,00,000
Annual equivalent fuel savings (A) = A 1 + G (A/G, 12%, 15)
= 6,00,000 + 50,000 (4.9803)
Present worth of the fuel savings (BP) = A(P/A, 12%, 15)
= 57 82 556
Since the BC ratio is more than 1, the construction of the bridge across the
river is justified.
A state government is planning a hydroelectric project for a
river basin. In addition to the production of electric power, this project will
provide flood control, irrigation and recreation benefits. The estimated benefits
and costs that are expected to be derived from this project are as follows:
Initial cost = Rs. 8,00,00,000
Annual power sales = Rs. 60,00,000
Annual flood control savings = Rs. 30,00,000
Annual irrigation benefits = Rs. 50,00,000
Annual recreation benefits = Rs. 20,00,000
Annual operating and maintenance costs = Rs. 30,00,000
Life of the project = 50 years
Check whether the state government should implement the project (Assume
Life of the project = 50 years, i = 12%
Total annual benefits
= Flood control savings + Irrigation benefits
+ Recreation benefits
= Rs. 30,00,000 + Rs. 50,00,000 + Rs. 20,00,000
Present worth of the benefits = Total annual benefits  (P/A, 12%, 50)
Present worth of costs = Initial cost + Present worth of annual operating
and maintenance cost
– Present worth of power sales
= Rs. 8,00,00,000 + 30,00,000  (P/A, 12%, 50)
= Rs. 8,00,00,000 + 30,00,000  8.3045
– 60,00,000  8.3045
BC ratio = Present worth of benefits
Present worth of costs
Since, the BC ratio is more than 1, the state government can implement the
hydroelectric project.
Two mutually exclusive projects are being considered for
investment. Project A 1 requires an initial outlay of Rs. 30,00,000 with net
receipts estimated as Rs. 9,00,000 per year for the next 5 years. The initial
outlay for the project A 2 is Rs. 60,00,000, and net receipts have been estimated
at Rs. 15,00,000 per year for the next seven years. There is no salvage value
associated with either of the projects. Using the benefit cost ratio, which project
would you select? Assume an interest rate of 10%.
Initial cost (P) = Rs. 30,00,000
Net benefits/year (B) = Rs. 9,00,000
Annual equivalent of initial cost = P  (A/P, 10%, 5)
= 30,00,000  0.2638
Benefit-cost ratio =
Annual equivalent benefit
Annual equivalent cost
Initial cost (P) = Rs. 60,00,000
Net benefits/year (B) = Rs. 15,00,000
Annual equivalent of initial cost = P  (A/P, 10%, 7)
= 60,00,000  0.2054
BC ratio = Annual equivalent benefit
= 15,00,000/12,32,400 = 1.217
The benefit-cost ratio of alternative A 2 is more than that of alternative A 1.
Hence, alternative A 2 is to be selected. The comparison is made on a
35-year period which is the minimum common multiple of the lives of
alternatives 1 and 2.
An inland state is presently connected to a seaport by means
of a railroad system. The annual goods transported is 1,00,00,000 ton km. The
average transport charge is Rs. 30/ton/km. Within the next 20 years, the
transport is likely to increase by 10,00,000 ton km per year.
It is proposed to broaden a river flowing from the state to the seaport at a
cost of Rs. 2,50,00,00,000. This will make the river navigable to barges and will
reduce the transport cost to Rs. 10.00/ton/km. The project will be financed by
10% bond at par. There would be some side effects of the change-over as
follows.
1. The railroad would be bankrupt and be sold for no salvage value. The right
of way, worth about Rs. 3,00,00,000, will revert to the state.
2. 300 employees will be out of employment. The state will have to pay to
each of them a welfare cheque of Rs. 48,000/year.
3. The reduction in the income from the taxes on the railroad will be
compensated by the taxes on the barges.
What is the benefit-cost ratio based on the next 20 years of operation? Also,
check whether broadening the river is justified.
Cost to the state
Life of the project = 20 years
Total cost of the project, P = Rs. 2,50,00,00,000
Annual goods transported = 1,00,00,000 ton km
Current average transport cost = Rs. 30/ton/km
Annual increase in goods transported = 10,00,000 ton km
Compensation for employees = Rs. 48,000/year/employee for 300 employees.
Annual compensation (C 1) = 48,000  300 = Rs. 1,44,00,000
Annual equivalent initial cost (C 2) = P  (A/P, 10%, 20)
= 2,50,00,00,000  0.1175
Total annual equivalent cost of the project, CA
= Annual equivalent initial cost
+ Annual compensation
= Rs. 29,37,50,000 + Rs. 1,44,00,000
Benefit to the state
Worth of the right of the way of the railroad to the state
Annual equivalent of the above amount (A 1)
= 3,00,00,000  (A/P, 10%, 20)
= 3,00,00,000  0.1175
Average goods transported/year = 1,00,00,000 ton/year
Average transport cost savings for year 1, (A 2)
Average annual increase in goods transport = 10,00,000 tons km.
Average increase in transportation cost savings/year (G)
Equivalent annual average transport cost savings (A 3)
= A 2 + G(A/G, 10%, 20)
= 20,00,00,000 + 2,00,00,000  6.5081
Total annual equivalent benefits to the state, BA
= A 1 + A 3
= Rs. 35,25,000 + Rs. 33,01,62,000
BC ratio = Total annual equivalent benefit
= Rs. 33,36,87,000/Rs. 30,81,50,000
= 1.08287 = 1.1 (approx.)
Since the BC ratio is more than 1, the project is justified.
A government is planning a hydroelectric project for a river
basin. In addition to the production of electric power, this project will provide
flood control, irrigation and recreation benefits. The estimated benefits and costs
that are expected from the three alternatives under consideration are given in the
Initial cost (P)
Annual equivalent
benefits & cost
(a) Operating & maintenance
(b) Power sales/year
(c) Flood control savings
(d) Irrigation benefits
(e) Recreation benefits
If the interest rate is 9% and the life of projects is estimated to be 50 years,
by comparing the BC ratios, determine which project should be selected.
Benefits/year = Flood control savings + irrigation benefits
+ Recreation benefits.
Costs/year = Annual equivalent cost of the initial cost
+ Operating and maintenance cost/year
– Power sales/year
Based on these guidelines, the computation of benefits, costs and BC ratio
for each of the projects are summarized in Table 10.1.
Illustration of Example 10.5 (Interest rate = 9%, n = 50 years)
1. Initial cost (P)
2. Annual equivalent of the
3. Operating & maintenance cost
5. Cost/year (2 + 3 – 4)
6. Flood control savings
9. Benefit/year (6 + 7 + 8)
From the last row of Table 10.1, it is clear that alternative A is the only
eligible alternative because the BC ratio of each of the other two alternatives is
less than one. Since A is the only eligible alternative, it is selected as the best
alternative for implementation.
1. Discuss the difference in evaluating alternatives of private and public
2. Consider the evaluation of the alternative of constructing a bridge across a
river. List the different benefits and costs related to this alternative.
3. In a particular locality of a state, presently, the vehicle users take a
roundabout route to reach certain places because of the presence of a river.
This results in excessive time of travel and increased fuel cost. So, the state
government is planning to construct a bridge across the river. The estimated
initial investment for constructing the bridge is Rs. 40,00,000. The
estimated life of the bridge is 15 years. The annual operation and
maintenance cost is Rs. 2,50,000. The value of fuel savings due to the
construction of the bridge is Rs. 6,00,000 in the first year and it increases
by Rs. 50,000 every year thereafter till the end of the life of the bridge.
Check whether the project is justified based on BC ratio by assuming an
interest rate of 20%, compounded annually.
4. A state government is planning a hydroelectric project for a river basin. In
addition to the production of electric power, this project will provide flood
control, irrigation and recreation benefits. The estimated benefits and costs
that are expected to be derived from this project are listed below.
Initial cost = Rs. 18,00,00,000
Annual power sales = Rs. 1,20,00,000
Annual flood control savings = Rs. 50,00,000
Annual irrigation benefits = Rs. 80,00,000
Annual recreation benefits = Rs. 40,00,000
Annual operating and maintenance costs = Rs. 50,00,000
Life of the project = 40 years
5. Two mutually exclusive projects are being considered for investment.
Project A 1 requires an initial outlay of Rs. 50,00,000 with net receipts
estimated to be Rs. 11,00,000 per year for the next eight years. The initial
outlay for the project A 2 is Rs. 80,00,000, and net receipts have been
estimated at Rs. 20,00,000 per year for the next eight years. There is no
salvage value associated with either of the projects. Using the BC ratio,
which project would you select? Assume an interest rate of 15%.
6. An inland state is presently connected to a seaport by means of a railroad
system. The annual goods transported amount to 1,50,00,000 ton kilometre.
The average transport charge is Rs. 40/ton/km. Within the next 25 years, the
transport is likely to increase by 15,00,000 ton kilometre per year.
It is proposed to improve a river flowing from the state to the seaport at
a cost of Rs. 3,00,00,00,000. This will make the river navigable to barges
and will reduce the transport cost to Rs. 12.00/ton/km. The project will be
financed by 12% bond at par. There would be some side effects of the
change-over as follows.
(a) The railroad would be bankrupt and would be sold for no salvage
value. The right of way, worth about Rs. 4,00,00,000, will revert to the
state.
(b) 400 employees will be out of employment. The state will have to pay
to each of them a welfare cheque of Rs. 60,000/year.
(c) The reduction in the income from the taxes on the railroad will be
What is the BC ratio based on the next 25 years of operation? Also,
7. A government is planning a hydroelectric project for a river basin. Besides
the production of electric power, this project will provide flood control,
irrigation and recreation benefits. The estimated benefits and costs expected
from the three alternatives under consideration are listed in the following
table:
If the interest rate is 10% and the life of the projects is estimated to be
40 years, by comparing the BC ratios, determine which project should be
A general inflationary trend in the cost of goods is common everywhere due to
various interacting factors. If the rate of inflation is very high, it will produce
extremely serious consequences for both individuals and institutions.
Inflation is the rate of increase in the prices of goods per period. So, it has a
compounding effect. Thus, prices that are inflated at a rate of 7% per year will
increase 7% in the first year, and for the next year the expected increase will be 7%
of these new prices. The same is true for succeeding years and hence the rate of
inflation is compounded in the same manner that an interest rate is compounded. If
the average inflation over six years period is 7%, then the prices at the beginning of
the seventh year would be 150% that of the first year by assuming 100% for the
prices at the beginning of the first year of the six-year period.
If economic decisions are taken without considering the effect of inflation
into account, most of them would become meaningless and as a result the
organizations would end up with unpredictable return.
But there is always difficulty in determining the rate of inflation. The worldwide trend/wish is to curtail inflation. But due to various reasons, it is very
difficult to have zero inflation. For practical decision making, an average
estimate may be assumed depending on the period of the proposals under
consideration. Hence, we need a procedure which will combine the effects of
inflation rate and interest rate to take realistic economic decision.
PROCEDURE TO ADJUST INFLATION
A procedure to deal with this situation is summarized now.
1. Estimate all the costs/returns associated with an investment proposal in
terms of today’s rupees.
2. Modify the costs/returns estimated in step 1 using an assumed inflation
rate so that at each future date they represent the costs/returns at that
date in terms of the rupees that must be expended/received at that time,
respectively.
3. As per our requirement, calculate either the annual equivalent amount or
future amount or present amount of the cash flow resulting from step 2
by considering the time value of money.
Overall cash flow diagram.
Suppose a 40-year old man is planning for his retirement. He
plans to retire at the age of 60 and estimates that he can live comfortably on
Rs. 24,000 per year in terms of today’s rupee value. He can invest his savings
at 15% compounded annually. Assume an average inflation rate of 9% for the
What equal amount should he save each year until he retires so that he can
make withdrawals at the end of each year commencing from the end of the 21 st
year from now that will allow him to live as comfortably as he desires for 10
years beyond his retirement?
Step 1. The estimated future requirement per year in terms of today’s
rupees from his age 61 through 70 is Rs. 24,000.
Step 2. Modification of the costs estimated in step 1 is summarized in
Table 11.1. The formula which is given below is used to get future equivalent
of Rs. 24,000 with the inflation of 9% per year (IR-inflation rate).
F = P (1 + IR)n
Inflated Future Requirements
Age
Inflated value of Rs. 24,000 at each year end
24,000  (1 + 0.09)21 = Rs. 1,46,611
24,000  (1 + 0.09)22 = Rs. 1,59,806
24,000  (1 + 0.09)23 = Rs. 1,74,189
24,000  (1 + 0.09)24 = Rs. 1,89,866
24,000  (1 + 0.09)25 = Rs. 2,06,954
24,000  (1 + 0.09)26 = Rs. 2,25,580
24,000  (1 + 0.09)27 = Rs. 2,45,882
24,000  (1 + 0.09)28 = Rs. 2,68,011
24,000  (1 + 0.09)29 = Rs. 2,92,132
24,000  (1 + 0.09)30 = Rs. 3,18,424
Step 3. Now, the calculation of the equivalent amount of cash flow as per
the requirement is presented.
The overall cash flow diagram for the savings and withdrawal in terms of
future rupees is shown in Fig. 11.1.
Inflation Adjusted Decisions
The sum of the present equivalents of the year end withdrawals from the
year 21 to 30 is computed by assuming the end of the year 20 as the base (time
zero) and it is shown at the end of the year 20 in Fig. 11.2. The method of
computing the present equivalent of the withdrawals is as follows:
1,46,611/(1 + 0.15)1 + 1,59,806/(1 + 0.15)2
+ 1,74,189/(1 + 0.15)3 + 1,89,866/(1 + 0.15)4
+ 2,06,954/(1 + 0.15)5 + 2,25,580/(1 + 0.15)6
+ 2,45,882/(1 + 0.15)7 + 2,68,011/(1 + 0.15)8
+ 2,92,132/(1 + 0.15)9 + 3,18,424/(1 + 0.15)10
Equivalent cash flow diagram.
The annual equivalent amount (A), which should be invested from the end of
year 1 (age 41) to year 20 (age 60), is computed using the following formula.
Recommendation:
The person has to invest an amount of Rs. 9,934 at the
end of every year starting from his age 41 (year 1) through 60 (year 20) which
will enable him to make withdrawals at the end of every year starting from
his age 61 (year 21) through 70 (year 30) as shown in the Table 11.1 (also in
INFLATION ADJUSTED ECONOMIC LIFE OF MACHINE
In any industrial/service organization, equipment/machinery forms an important
element. The productivity of any organization is a function of many factors. It
is largely affected by efficient and effective use of machinery and equipment.
So, operations and maintenance of these equipment are very important to the
organization.
A machine which is purchased today cannot be used forever. It has a
definite economic lifetime. After the economic life, the machine should be
replaced with a substitute machine with similar operational capabilities. This
kind of analysis is called replacement analysis.
The elements of costs involved in the replacement analysis are as follows:
1. Purchase cost (initial cost)
2. Annual operation and maintenance cost
3. Salvage value at the end of every year, if it is significant
The trade-off between different cost elements is shown in Fig. 11.3.
From Fig. 11.3, it is clear that the sum of operation and maintenance cost
increases with the life of the machine. But the capital recovery with return
decreases with the life of the machine. The total cost of the machine goes on
decreasing initially but it starts increasing after some years. The year with the
minimum total cost is called as the economic life of the machine.
Limitation of Existing Model
In the case where the machine is replaced due to wear and tear, the following
costs are considered (refer Chapter 8):
2. Operation and maintenance cost
Average operating &
Capital recovery
cost with return
In the existing model to deal with this type of replacement analysis, the
different cost elements are estimated without taking the effect of inflation into
account.
The annual cost of operation and maintenance of the machine will increase
with the age of the machine due to decline in efficiency of the machine. In the
existing model, this increase in the operation and maintenance cost is taken into
account. But the increase in the operation and maintenance cost due to inflation
is not considered. Similarly, in the existing model, the salvage value is estimated
without taking into account the effect of inflation.
To highlight this particular fact on salvage value, an example is now given.
The internal combustion engines (R. A. Lister) which were made in England
during pre-independence of India are still functioning well. Their resale value is
going up year after year. This may be partly due to inflation and partly due to
good quality of the engine parts. So, consideration of the effect of the inflation
on the economic life of the machine is a realistic approach.
In replacement analysis, a discount rate is usually assumed to reflect the
time value of money. First the concept of replacement analysis is demonstrated
without taking the inflation into account. Then, the same is demonstrated by
taking the effect of inflation into account. At the end, a comparison between the
two models is presented.
Economic Life Determination without Inflationary
Effect
The determination of economic life of a machine without considering the effect
of inflation is demonstrated using the following example.
A machine costs Rs. 5,00,000. Its annual operation cost
during the first year is Rs. 40,000 and it increases by Rs. 5,000 every year
thereafter. The maintenance cost during the first year is Rs. 60,000 and it
increases by Rs. 6,000 every year thereafter. The resale value of the machine is
Rs. 4,00,000 at the end of the first year and it decreases by Rs. 50,000 every
year thereafter. Assume an interest rate (discounting factor) of 20%.
The method of finding the economic life of the machine with a discounting
factor of 20% at zero inflation rate is summarized in Table 11.2. From the table
it is clear that the total annual equivalent cost is minimum if the machine is used
for 14 years. Hence, the economic life of the machine is 14 years.
Economic Life Determination with Inflationary Effect
The illustration in Section 11.3.2 is reconsidered for analyzing the effect of
inflation on the economic life of the machine. An average annual inflation rate
of 6% is assumed for discussion. The corresponding steps are explained in
From the Table 11.3, it is clear that the total annual equivalent cost is
minimum if the machine is used for three years. Thus, the economic life of the
machine is three years.
Determination of Economic Life of the Machine without Inflation
Opera Mainte Opera Present
tion
nance
tion &
worth of
of column
maint.
amount
Column 7 – 9 (i = 20%)
***Total annual equivalent cost is minimum if the machine is used for 14 years.
Determination of Economic Life of the Machine with Inflationary Effect
Opera Mainte Sum of
Inflated
& mainte& maint.
amount of total
nance cost
***Total annual equivalent cost is minimum if machine is used for three years.
Comparison of results
The results of the two approaches are summarized in Table 11.4. From the
table, it is clear that the inflation has an effect on the economic life of the
machine. Since it is meaningful and realistic to analyze this type of problem by
considering the effect of inflation, the second approach should be used for such
Results of the Two Approaches
Approach
Minimum annual
Corresponding
equivalent cost
Replacement analysis without
inflation effect
Replacement analysis with
A company has received quotes for its recent advertisement
for the purchase of a sophisticated milling machine. The data are as per the
estimate in today’s rupee value.
Purchase price (Rs.)
Machine life (years)
Assuming an average annual inflation of 5% for the next five years,
determine the best machine based on the present worth method. Interest rate is
Average annual inflation rate = 5%
Interest rate = 15% compounded annually
Purchase price = Rs.15,00,000
Machine life = 7 years
Salvage value at the end of machine life = Rs. 2,00,000
Annual operating & maintenance cost = Rs. 3,00,000
The computation of the present worth of the annual operating and
maintenance costs of the machine X is summarized in Table 11.5.
Computation of the Present Worth of the Annual Operating and Maintenance
Costs of Machine X
Annual operating
Inflation
Inflated annual
Present worth of
factor
operating &
The equation for the present worth of the machine X is
PWX(15%) = Purchase price
+ Present worth of inflated annual and operating cost
– Present worth of the salvage value
= 15,00,000 + 14,83,680 – 2,00,000 (inflation factor)
= 15,00,000 + 14,83,680 – 2,00,000(F/P, 5%, 7) (P/F, 15%, 7)
= 15,00,000 + 14,83,680 – 2,00,000  1.407  0.3759
Purchase price = Rs. 20,00,000
Salvage value at the end of machine life = Rs. 3,00,000
Annual operating & maintenance cost = Rs. 2,50,000
The computation of the present worth of the annual operating and
maintenance costs of the machine Y is summarized in Table 11.6.
Computation of the Present Worth of the Annual Operating and
Maintenance Costs of Machine Y
The expression for the present worth of machine Y is
PWY(15%) = Purchase price
= 20,00,000 + 12,36,400 – 3,00,000 
(inflation factor)  (P/F, 15%, 7)
= 20,00,000 + 12,36,400 – 3,00,000 (F/P, 5%, 7) (P/F, 15%, 7)
= 20,00,000 + 12,36,400 – 3,00,000  1.407  0.3759
Remark.
Since the present worth cost of machine X is less than that of
machine Y, select machine X.
A company is planning to start an employee welfare fund. It
needs Rs. 50,00,000 during the first year and it increases by Rs. 5,00,000 every
year thereafter up to the end of the 5 th year. The above figures are in terms of
todays rupee value. The annual average rate of inflation is 6% for the next five
years. The interest rate is 18%, compounded annually. Find the single deposit
which will provide the required series of fund towards employees welfare
scheme after taking the inflation rate into account.
Fund requirement during the first year = Rs. 50,00,000
Annual increase in the fund requirement = Rs. 5,00,000
Annual inflation rate = 6%
Interest rate = 18%, compounded annually
The computation of the present worth of the annual fund requirements is
summarized in Table 11.7.
Table 11.7 Computation of the Present Worth of the Annual Requirements
Annual fund
requirements
fund requirements 18%, n
fund requirements
The value of the single deposit to be made now to receive the specified series
for the next five years is Rs. 2,16,05,704.
2. Discuss the impact of inflation on investment decision.
3. Suppose a 50-year old man is planning for his retirement. He plans to retire
at the age of 60 and estimates that he can live comfortably on Rs. 40,000
per year in terms of today’s rupee value. Let us assume the average inflation
rate for the next 20 years is 7% per year. This is only an assumption. He
can invest his savings at 20%, compounded annually.
What equal amount should he save each year until he retires so that he
can make withdrawals that will allow him to live as comfortably as he
desires for 10 years beyond his retirement?
4. A machine costs Rs. 7,00,000. Its annual operation cost during the first
year is Rs. 60,000 and it increases by Rs. 7,000 every year thereafter.
The maintenance cost during the first year is Rs. 80,000 and it increases
by Rs. 10,000 every year thereafter. The resale value of the machine is
Rs. 3,00,000 at the end of the first year and it decreases by Rs. 75,000 every
year thereafter. Assume an interest rate (discounting factor) of 20% and
inflation of 5%, compounded yearly. Find the inflation adjusted economic
life of the machine.
Inventory is essential to provide flexibility in operating a system. Inventory can
be classified into raw materials inventory, in-process inventory, and finished
goods inventory. The raw material inventories obviate the need for dependency
between suppliers and plants. The work-in-process inventories eliminate
dependency between machines of a product line. The finished goods inventory
remove dependency between plant and its customers/market.
The main functions of inventory are:
1. Smoothing out irregularities in supply
2. Minimizing the production cost
3. Allowing organizations to cope with perishable materials
Inventory decisions
Two basic inventory decisions are generally taken by managers:
1. When should the inventory of an item be replaced?
2. How much of an item is to be ordered when the inventory of that item
has to be replenished?
Costs trade-off
If we place frequent orders, the cost of order will be more, but the inventory
carrying cost will be less. On the other hand, if we place less frequent orders,
the ordering cost will be less, but the carrying cost will be more. These are
shown in Fig. 12.1. In the figure, for an increase in Q (order size), the carrying
cost increases and the ordering cost decreases.
In Fig. 12.1, the total cost curve represents the sum of the ordering cost and
carrying cost for each order size. The order size at which the total cost is
minimum is called the Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) or Q* (optimal order
There are different models of inventory. The inventory models can be
classified into deterministic models and probabilistic models. The various
deterministic models are as follows:
Inventory Control
1. Purchase model with instantaneous replenishment and without shortages
2. Manufacturing model without shortages
3. Purchase model with instantaneous replenishment and with shortages
4. Manufacturing model with shortages
These models are explained in the following sections.
PURCHASE MODEL WITH INSTANTANEOUS
REPLENISHMENT AND WITHOUT SHORTAGES
In this model of inventory, orders of equal size are placed at periodical intervals.
The items against an order are replenished instantaneously and they are
consumed at a constant rate. The purchase price per unit is same irrespective of
order size. Let
D = annual demand in units
Co = ordering cost/order
Cc = carrying cost/unit/year
P = purchase price/unit
Q = order size
Trade-off between costs.
Order quantity
Carrying
Ordering
Then, the corresponding model is shown in Fig. 12.2.
Units
Purchase model without shortages.
For this model, the formula for the EOQ is as follows:
o
c
No. of orders = D
Time between orders = Q
Krishna Industry needs 24,000 units/year of a bought-out
component which will be used in its main product. The ordering cost is Rs.150
per order and the carrying cost per unit per year is 18% of the purchase price
per unit. The purchase price per unit is Rs. 75. Find
(a) Economic order quantity
(b) No. of orders per year
(c) Time between successive orders
(a) D = 24,000 units/year
Co = Rs. 150/order
Purchase price/unit = Rs. 75.
Cc = Rs. 75  0.18 = Rs. 13.5/unit/year
= 730 units (approx.)
No. of orders/year = D
Time between successive orders = Q
MANUFACTURING MODEL WITHOUT SHORTAGES
If a company manufactures its component which is required for its main
product, then the corresponding model of inventory is called the “manufacturing
model”. This model will be with or without shortages. The rate of consumption
of items is uniform throughout the year. The cost of production per unit is same
irrespective of production lot size. Let
r = annual demand of an item
k = production rate of the item (No. of units produced per year)
Co = cost per set-up.
Cc = carrying cost per unit per year.
p = cost of production per unit
t 1 = period of production as well as consumption satisfying requirement for
the period
t 2 = period of consumption only.
Q = production size
The operation of the manufacturing model without shortages is shown in
Manufacturing model without shortages.
During the period t 1, the item is produced at the rate of k units per period
and simultaneously it is consumed at the rate of r units per period. So, during
k – r
r
this period, the inventory is built at the rate of k – r units per period. During the
period t 2, the production of the item is discontinued but the consumption of that
item is continued. Hence, the inventory is decreased at the rate of r units per
period during this period.
The various formulae for this situation are as follows:
Q* = EOQ =
C r
r k
k
r t
Cycle time = t 1* + t 2*
No. of set-ups/year = r/Q*
If a product is to be manufactured within the company, the
particulars are:
r = 12,000 units/year
k = 24,000 units/year
Co = Rs. 175/set-up
Cc = Rs. 15/unit/year
Find the EOQ and cycle time.
= 749 units (approx.)
= 0.031 year = 0.372 month = 11 days (approx.)
= 0.031 year = 0.372 month = 11 days
= 11 + 11 = 22 days
No. of set-ups/year = r/Q* = 12,000/749 = 16.02
PURCHASE MODEL WITH SHORTAGES
(Instantaneous Supply)
In this model, the items on order will be received instantaneously and they are
consumed at a constant rate. The purchase price per unit is same irrespective of
order size. If there is no stock at the time of receiving a request for the items,
it is assumed that it will be satisfied at a later date with a penalty. This is called
backordering. The operation of this model is illustrated in Fig. 12.4.
The variables which are used in this model are
D = demand/period
Cc = carrying cost/unit/period
Cs = shortage cost/unit/period
Purchase model of inventory with shortages.
In the above model,
Q = order size,
Q 1 = maximum inventory,
Q 2 = maximum stock-out,
t 1 = period of positive stock,
t 2 = period of shortage.
No. of orders/year = D/Q*
The annual demand for a component is 30,000 units. The
carrying cost is Rs. 2.00/unit/year, the ordering cost is Rs. 100.00/order, and
the shortage cost is Rs. 12.00/unit/year. Find the optimal values of the following:
(a) Ordering quantity
(b) Maximum inventory
(c) Maximum shortage quantity
(d) Cycle time
(e) Inventory period (t 1)
(f) Shortage period (t 2)
D = 30,000 units/year
Cc = Rs. 2.00/unit/year
Co = Rs. 100/order
Cs = Rs. 12/unit/year
Q 2* = 1,871 – 1,604 = 267 units
t* = Q*/D = (1,871/30,000)  365 = 23 days (approx.)
t 1* = Q 1*/D = (1,604/30,000)  365 = 20 days
t 2* = t* – t 1* = 23 – 20 = 3 days
No. of orders/year = D/Q* = 30,000/1,871 = 16.03
MANUFACTURING MODEL WITH SHORTAGES
In this model, the items are produced and consumed simultaneously for a
portion of the cycle time. During the remaining cycle time, the items are only
consumed. The cost of production per unit is same irrespective of production lot
size. In this model, stock-out is permitted. It is assumed that the stock-out units
will be satisfied from the units which will be produced at a later date with a
penalty. This is called backordering. The operation of this model is shown in
Fig. 12.5. The variables which are used in this model are given now.
r = annual demand of an item per period
k = production rate of the item (No. of units produced per period)
Cc = carrying cost per unit per period
Cs = shortage cost per unit per period
t 1 = period of production as well as consumption satisfying period’s
requirement
t 2 = period of consumption only
t 3 = period of shortage
t 4 = period of production as well as consumption satisfying back order
Manufacturing model of inventory with shortages.
Q 1 = maximum inventory
Q 2 = maximum stock-out
The formulae for the optimal values of the above variables are presented now.
kr
The demand for an item is 12,000/year. Its production rate is
2,000/month. The carrying cost is Re. 0.20/unit/month and the set-up cost is
Rs. 400.00/set-up. The shortage cost is Rs. 15.00/unit/year. Find the various
parameters of the inventory system.
k = 2,000  12 = 24,000 units/year
Co = Rs. 400/set-up.
Cc = Rs. (0.20  12) = Rs. 2.40/year
Cs = Rs. 15.00/unit/year
(24,000 12,000) (2.40 + 15)
= 3,046 units (approx.)
t* = [Q*/r]365 days = [3,046/12,000]365 days = 93 days
t 1* = [Q 1*/(k – r)]365 days = [1,313/(24,000 – 12,000)]365 days
t 2* = [Q 1*/r]365 days = [1,313/12,000]365 days = 40 days
t 3* = [Q 2*/r]365 days = [210/12,000]365 days = 7 days
t 4* = [Q 2*/(k – r)]365 days = [210/(24,000 – 12,000)]365 days
1. What are the reasons for stocking items in inventory?
2. List and explain different types of costs in the inventory system.
3. What are the types of model of inventory system? Explain them in brief.
4. Explain the cost trade-off of the purchase model of inventory system without
shortage.
5. Alpha Industry estimates that it will sell 12,000 units of its product for the
forthcoming year. The ordering cost is Rs. 100 per order and the carrying
cost per unit per year is 20% of the purchase price per unit. The purchase
price per unit is Rs. 50. Find:
(a) Economic order size
6. A product is to be manufactured within the company whose details are as
r = 24,000 units/year
k = 48,000 units/year
Co = Rs. 200/set-up
Cc = Rs. 20/unit/year
7. The annual demand for an automobile component is 24,000 units. The
carrying cost is Rs. 0.40/unit/year, the ordering cost is Rs. 20.00/order, and
the shortage cost is Rs. 10.00/unit/year. Find the optimal values of the
following:
(f) Shortage period (t 2).
8. The demand for an item is 18,000 per year. Its production rate is 3,000/
month. The carrying cost is Re. 0.15/unit/month, and the set-up cost is
Rs. 500.00/set-up. The shortage cost is Rs. 20.00/unit/year. Find various
MAKE OR BUY DECISION
In the process of carrying out business activities of an organization, a
component/product can be made within the organization or bought from a
subcontractor. Each decision involves its own costs. So, in a given situation, the
organization should evaluate each of the above make or buy alternatives and
then select the alternative which results in the lowest cost. This is an important
decision since it affects the productivity of the organization. In the long run, the
make or buy decision is not static. The make option of a component/product
may be economical today; but after some time, it may turn out to be
uneconomical to make the same.
Thus, the make or buy decision should be reviewed periodically, say, every
1 to 3 years. This is mainly to cope with the changes in the level of competition
and various other environmental factors.
CRITERIA FOR MAKE OR BUY
In this section the criteria for make or buy are discussed.
Criteria for make
The following are the criteria for make:
1. The finished product can be made cheaper by the firm than by outside
suppliers.
2. The finished product is being manufactured only by a limited number of
outside firms which are unable to meet the demand.
3. The part has an importance for the firm and requires extremely close
quality control.
4. The part can be manufactured with the firm’s existing facilities and
similar to other items in which the company has manufacturing
experience.
Criteria for buy
The following are the criteria for buy:
1. Requires high investments on facilities which are already available at
suppliers plant.
2. The company does not have facilities to make it and there are more
profitable opportunities for investing company’s capital.
3. Existing facilities of the company can be used more economically to
make other parts.
4. The skill of personnel employed by the company is not readily adaptable
to make the part.
5. Patent or other legal barriers prevent the company for making the part.
6. Demand for the part is either temporary or seasonal.
APPROACHES FOR MAKE OR BUY DECISION
Types of analysis followed in make or buy decision are as follows:
1. Simple cost analysis
Simple Cost Analysis
The concept is illustrated using an example problem.
A company has extra capacity that can be used to produce
a sophisticated fixture which it has been buying for Rs. 900 each. If the
company makes the fixtures, it will incur materials cost of Rs. 300 per unit,
labour costs of Rs. 250 per unit, and variable overhead costs of Rs. 100 per unit.
The annual fixed cost associated with the unused capacity is Rs. 10,00,000.
Demand over the next year is estimated at 5,000 units. Would it be profitable for
the company to make the fixtures?
We assume that the unused capacity has alternative use.
Cost to make
Variable cost/unit = Material + labour + overheads
= Rs. 300 + Rs. 250 + Rs. 100
Total variable cost = (5,000 units) (Rs. 650/unit)
Add fixed cost associated
with unused capacity
Cost to buy
Purchase cost
= (5,000 units) (Rs. 900/unit)
The cost of making fixtures is less than the cost of buying fixtures from
outside. Therefore, the organization should make the fixtures.
Economic Analysis
The following inventory models are considered to illustrate this concept:
Purchase model
Manufacturing model
The formulae for EOQ and total cost (TC) for each model are given in the
following table:
Purchase model
Manufacturing model
TC = D  P + DC
Cc
+ Cc (k – r) Q
D = demand/year
Co = ordering cost/order or set-up cost/set-up
k = production rate (No. of units/year)
r = demand/year
Q 1 = economic order size
Q 2 = economic production size
TC = total cost per year
An item has a yearly demand of 2,000 units. The different
costs in respect of make and buy are as follows. Determine the best option.
Buy
Make
Item cost/unit
Procurement cost/order
Set-up cost/set-up
Annual carrying cost/
item/year
Production rate/year
Buy option
D = 2,000 units/year
Co = Rs. 120/order
Cc = Rs. 1.60/unit/year
= 548 units (approx.)
TC = DP +
1 + Q Cc
= 2,000  8 + 2000
Make option
Co = Rs. 60/set-up
r = 2,000 units/year
Cc = Re 1/unit/year
k = 8,000 units/year
= 566 units (approx.)
TC = total cost
FC = fixed cost
TC = FC + variable cost
B = the intersection of TC and sales (no loss or no gain situation)
A = break-even sales
C = break-even quantity/break-even point (BEP)
The formula for the break-even point (BEP) is
TC = DP + D
= 2,000  5.00 + 2000
Result: The cost of making is less than the cost of buying. Therefore, the firm
should go in for the making option.
Break-even Analysis
The break-even analysis chart is shown in Fig. 13.1. In the figure
A manufacturer of TV buys TV cabinet at Rs. 500 each. In
case the company makes it within the factory, the fixed and variable costs would
be Rs. 4,00,000 and Rs. 300 per cabinet respectively. Should the manufacturer
make or buy the cabinet if the demand is 1,500 TV cabinets?.
Selling price/unit (SP)
Variable cost/unit (VC)
Since the demand (1,500 units) is less than the break-even quantity, the
company should buy the cabinets for its TV production.
There are three alternatives available to meet the demand of
a particular product. They are as follows:
(a) Manufacturing the product by using process A
(b) Manufacturing the product by using process B
(c) Buying the product
The details are as given in the following table:
Cost elements
Manufacturing
the product by
process A
process B
Fixed cost/year (Rs.)
Variable/unit (Rs.)
Purchase price/unit (Rs.)
The annual demand of the product is 8,000 units. Should the company make
the product using process A or process B or buy it?
Annual cost of process A = FC + VC  Volume
= 5,00,000 + 175  8,000
Annual cost of process B = FC + VC  Volume
= 6,00,000 + 150  8,000
Annual cost of buy
= Purchase price/unit  Volume
= 125  8,000
Since the annual cost of buy option is the minimum among all the
alternatives, the company should buy the product.
Briefly explain the various criteria for make or buy decisions.
What are the approaches available for make or buy decisions? Explain any
one of them with a suitable example.
An automobile company has extra capacity that can be used to produce
gears that the company has been buying for Rs. 300 each. If the company
makes gears, it will incur materials cost of Rs. 90 per unit, labour costs of
Rs. 120 per unit, and variable overhead costs of Rs. 30 per unit. The annual
fixed cost associated with the unused capacity is Rs. 2,40,000. Demand for
next year is estimated at 4,000 units.
(a) Would it be profitable for the company to make the gears?
(b) Suppose the capacity could be used by another department for the
production of some agricultural equipment that would cover its fixed
and variable cost and contribute Rs. 90,000 to profit which would
be more advantageous, gear production or agricultural equipment
production?
An item has an yearly demand of 1,000 units. The different costs with
regard to make and buy are as follows. Determine the best option.
Annual carrying cost/item/year
A manufacturer of motor cycles buys side boxes at Rs. 240 each. In case
he makes it himself, the fixed and variable costs would be Rs. 30,00,000
and Rs. 90 per side box respectively. Should the manufacturer make or buy
the side boxes if the demand is 2,500 side boxes?
There are three alternatives available to meet the demand of a particular
product. They are as follows:
The details are as follows:
using process A
using process B
Fixed cost/year
Variable cost/unit
Purchase price/unit
The annual demand of the product is 10,000 units.
(a) Should the company make the product using process A or process B or
buy it?
(b) At what annual volume should the company switch from buying
to manufacturing the product by using process A?
(c) At what annual volume, should the company switch from process A
to B?
A project consists of interrelated activities which are to be executed in a certain
order before the entire task is completed. The activities are interrelated in a
logical sequence, which is known as precedence relationship. An activity of a
project cannot be started until all its immediate preceding activities are
completed. Some of the typical projects are as follows:
 Construction of a house
 Commissioning of a factory
 Construction of a ship
 Fabrication of a steam boiler
 Construction of a bridge
 Construction of a dam
 Commissioning of a power plant
 Shutdown maintenance of major equipment/plants
 State level professional course admission process
 New product launching
 Launching a new weapon system
 Conducting national elections
 Research to develop a new technology
 Construction of railway coaches
Project management is generally applied for constructing public utilities,
large industrial projects, and organizing mega events. Project management is
considered to be an important field in production scheduling mainly because
many of the industrial activities can also be viewed as project management
problems. For example, fabrication of boilers, construction of railway coaches,
launching satellites, product launching, organizing R&D activities, etc. can be
viewed as project management problems.
From the examples, one can recognize the fact that many of the projects are
repeated either by the same organization or by different organizations. Though
they are repeatable by nature, each project is unique in itself. In the case of the
new product launching of an organization, the first launching will be done at
some key city. Subsequent launchings will be done at other cities as per
priorities fixed by the marketing department of the organization. The project
Project Management
schedule which is prepared for the first city cannot be applied to other cities
without any modification because the time estimates of different activities of the
project (product launching) will be different for each city due to environmental
conditions. In some cases, addition or deletion of some activities will take place.
So, if a project is repeated at a different place/different time, then a detailed
planning effort is required.
Project is represented in the form of a network for the purpose of analytical
treatment to get solutions for scheduling and controlling its activities. A network
consists of a set of arcs which are connected meaningfully through a set of
nodes. The precedence relationship among various activities of a project can be
conveniently represented using a network. So, the collection of precedence
relationships among various activities of a project is known as project network.
There are two methods of representing any project in the network form.
There are: (i) Activities on Arrows Diagram (AOA diagram), and (ii) Activities
on Nodes Diagram (AON Diagram).
The AOA diagram is commonly used in project management. This concept
is demonstrated through two examples.
A construction company has listed various activities that are
involved in constructing a community hall. These are summarized along with
predecessor(s) details in Table 14.1.
Details of Activities and Predecessor(s) for Constructing Community Hall
Activity
Description
Immediate
predecessor(s)
Plan approval
Site preparation
Arranging foundation materials
Excavation for foundation
Carpentry work for door and window main
supporting frames
Laying foundation
Raising wall from foundation to window base
Raising wall from window base to lintel level
Roofing
Electrical wiring & fitting
Plastering
Making doors and windows & fitting them
White washing
Clearing the site before handing over
Draw a project network for the above project.
The project network summarizing the precedence relationships of
various activities of constructing the community hall is shown in Fig. 14.1. In
this figure, activities A and B are concurrent activities. Activities C, E and L can
be started only after completing activity A. Activity D follows activity B.
Activity F can be started only when activities C and D are completed. One can
use similar logic to infer the remaining precedence relationships in the Fig. 14.1.
Project network for construction of a community hall.
Nowadays, in all professional institutes, students selection
is done through a written test, group discussion and interview. Prior to the
written test, there are so many activities, which are to be performed right from
deciding the date of conducting all other events. Though the system looks
simple, the precedence relationships among the activities necessitate
coordination of these activities in completing the whole task of admitting
students to any professional course. A delay at any stage would lead to
ineffective operation of the system. Hence, this problem may be treated as a
project consisting of activities with precedence relationships as shown in
Table 14.2 (Rajkumar and Panneerselvam 1992). Construct a CPM network for
this problem.
Table 14.2 Precedence Relationships for Professional Course Admission Process
predecessors
Decide the date, time of the entrance test, group
discussion and interview
Decide the examination venue(s)
Call for application through advertisement
Print application form
Despatch applications
Receive and process applications and send hall tickets
Set question paper
Arrange invigilators, and examiner
Make seating arrangements
Conduct examination
Valuation and announcement of entrance test result
Conduct group discussion and interview
Publish admission result
The CPM network for the above problem is shown in Fig. 14.2.
Figure 14.2 shows how the precedence relations between various activities
of the admission project are defined. In this figure, activity A is the starting
activity. Activities B, C and D can be started only after activity A is completed.
Activity E can be started after completing activities D and C. The precedence
relationship between all other activities are defined in this manner. Activity M
is the final activity representing the end of the selection process.
There are two main basic techniques in project management, namely,
Critical Path Method (CPM), and Project Evaluation and Review Technique
(PERT). CPM was developed by E. I. Du Pont de Nemours & Company as an
application to construction projects and was later extended by Mauchly
Associates. PERT was developed by a consulting firm for scheduling the
research and development activities for the polaris missile program of US Navy.
In CPM, the activities timings are deterministic in nature. But in PERT, each
activity will have three time estimates: optimistic time, most likely time, and
pessimistic time. There are some more advanced topics in project management
which are as follows:
 Crashing of a project network
 Resource levelling
 Resource allocation
These advanced topics are beyond the scope of this book.
*D 1 and D 2 are dummy activities
Network for professional course admission process.
PHASES OF PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Project management has three phases: planning, scheduling and controlling.
The planning phase involves the following steps:
(a) Dividing the project into distinct activities.
(b) Estimating time requirement for each activity.
(c) Establishing precedence relationships among the activities.
(d) Construction of the arrow diagram (network).
The scheduling phase determines the start and end times of each and every
activity. These can be summarized in the form of a time chart/Gantt chart. For
each non-critical activity, the amount of slack time must be shown on the same
time chart. This will be useful at the time of adjusting non-critical activities for
resource levelling/resource allocation.
The control phase uses the arrow diagram and time chart for continuous
monitoring and progress reporting. In this phase, the network will be updated if
there is any variation in the proposed schedule.
GUIDELINES FOR NETWORK CONSTRUCTION
The terminologies which are used in network construction are explained as
Node:
Generally, a node represents the starting or ending of an activity.
Branch/Arc:
A branch represents the actual activity which consumes some
kind of resource.
Precedence relations of activities:
For any activity, the precedence relations
provide the following information:
1. The activities that precede it
2. The activities that follow it
3. The activities that may be concurrent with it.
Network construction requires a detailed list of individual activities of a
project, estimates of activity durations, and specifications of precedence
relationships among various activities of the project.
Rules for network construction
The following are the primary rules for constructing an AOA diagram:
1. The starting event and ending event of an activity are called tail event
and head event, respectively.
2. The network should have a unique starting node.
3. The network should have a unique completion node.
4. No activity has to be represented by more than one arc in the network.
5. No two activities need to have the same starting node and the same
ending node.
6. Dummy activity is an imaginary activity indicating precedence
relationship only. Duration of a dummy activity is zero.
CRITICAL PATH METHOD (CPM)
As stated earlier, CPM deals with project management involving deterministic
time estimates. In this section, the concept of CPM is demonstrated through an
Consider Table 14.3 summarizing the details of a project
Project Details
Duration
predecessor
(a) Construct the CPM network.
(b) Determine the critical path.
(c) Compute total floats and free floats for non-critical activities.
(a) The CPM network is shown in Fig. 14.3.
(b) Determination of critical path.
The critical path of a project network
is the longest path in the network. This can be identified by simply listing out
all the possible paths from the start node of the project (node 1) to the end node
of the project (node 10), and then selecting the path with the maximum sum of
activity times on that path.
This method has several drawbacks. In a large network, one may commit
mistake in listing all the paths. Moreover, this method will not provide necessary
details like total floats and free floats for further analysis.
A different approach is therefore to be used to identify the critical path.
This consists of two phases: Phase 1 determines the earliest start times (ES) of
all the nodes. This is called the forward pass; phase 2 determines the latest
completion times (LC) of various nodes. This is called the backward pass. Let
Dij = duration of the activity (i, j),
ESj = earliest start time of all the activities which emanate from node j,
LCj = latest completion time of all the activities that end at node j.
(i) Determination of earliest start times (ESj):
During forward pass, use
the following formula to compute the earliest start time for all nodes:
ESj = max
[ESi + Dij]
CPM network for Example 14.3.
The calculations of ESj are as follows:
NODE 1: For node 1, ES 1 = 0
NODE 3: ES 3 = max
i = 1 [ESi + Di 3]
= max [ES 1 + D 1,3] = 0 + 4 = 4
NODE 2: ES 2 = max
i = 1,3 [ESi + Di 2]
= max [(ES 1 + D 1,2), (ES 3 + D 3,2)]
= max (0 + 1, 4 + 2) = 6
NODE 4: ES 4 = max
i = 1,3 [ESi + Di 4]
= max [ES 1 + D 1,4, ES 3 + D 3,4]
= max (0 + 2, 4 + 3) = 7
Similarly, the ESj values for all other nodes are computed and summarized
Network with critical path calculations.
(ii) Determination of latest completion times (LCi).
During backward
pass, the following formula is used to compute the latest completion times (LCi):
LCi = min
j [LCj – Dij]
NODE 10: For the last node 10, LC 10 = ES 10 = 22.
j = 10 [LCj – D 9, j]
= min [LC 10 – D 9,10] = 22 – 7 = 15.
j = 10 [LCj – D 8, j]
= min [LC 10 – D 8,10] = 22 – 4 = 18.
j = 9 [LCj – D 7, j]
= min [LC 9 – D 7,9] = 15 – 2 = 13.
j = 8,9 [LCj – D 6, j]
= min [LC 8 – D 6,8, LC 9 – D 6,9]
= min [18 – 6, 15 – 5] = 10
Similarly, the LCj values for all other nodes are summarized in
An activity (i, j) is said to be critical if all the following conditions are
satisfied:
(i) ESi = LCi
(ii) ESj = LCj
(iii) ESj – ESi = LCj – LCi = Dij
By applying the above conditions to the activities in Fig. 14.4, the critical
activities are identified and are shown in the same figure with cross lines on
them. The corresponding critical path is 1–3–4–6–9–10 (B–E–I–M–Q).
(c) Determination of Total Floats and Free Floats
It is the amount of time that the completion time of an activity
can be delayed without affecting the project completion time.
TFij = LCj – ESi – Dij
= LCj – (ESi + Dij) = LCj – ECij
where ECij is the earliest completion of the activity (i, j).
Also, TFij = LSij – ESi, where LSij is the latest start of the activity (i, j).
LSij = LCj – Dij
It is the amount of time that the activity completion time can be
delayed without affecting the earliest start time of immediate successor activities
in the network.
FFij = ESj – ESi – Dij
= ESj – (ESi + Dij) = ESj – ECij
A summary of calculations of total floats and free floats of the activities is
given in Table 14.4.
Total Floats and Free Floats
Activity (i, j)
Duration (Dij)
Total float (TFij)
Free float (FFij)
Any critical activity will have zero total float (TFij) and zero free float
(FFij). Based on this property, one can determine the critical activities.
From Table 14.4, one can check that the total floats and free floats for the
activities (1,3), (3,4), (4,6), (6,9) and (9,10) are zero. Therefore, they are critical
activities.
The corresponding critical path is 1–3–4–6–9–10 (B–E–I–M–Q).
The next stage after completing network calculations is to draw a Gantt chart/
time chart. The start time and completion time of each and every activity will
be represented on this chart. This chart gives a clear calendar schedule for the
whole project.
This chart is also used for resource levelling purpose. When there are
limitations on the available resource(s) (manpower, equipment, money, etc.),
using this chart, one can adjust the schedule of non-critical activities, depending
upon their total floats to minimize the peak requirement of resource(s). This
helps to level the resource requirements smoothly throughout the project
execution. Even if there is no restriction on any resource, it is the usual practice
to smooth out the resource requirements by resource levelling technique.
The time chart for the example problem is given in Fig. 14.5.
Time (months)
Activities
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10111213141516171819202122
Time chart/Gantt chart.
In Fig. 14.5, the thick line represents the schedule for various critical
activities [(1,3), (3,4), (4,6), (6,9) and (9,10)]. The horizontal dashed lines
represent the total time span over which a non-critical activity can be performed.
As stated earlier, a non-critical activity will have float in excess of its time
duration. So, it is possible to adjust the start and completion time of any noncritical activity over its entire range shown by the dashed lines without delaying
the project completion time. Infinite number of schedules are possible for the
non-critical activities. But to give a finite number of schedules, we consider
only two types of schedules: 1) earliest start schedule, and 2) latest start
schedule. These are shown by continuous horizontal lines over and below the
dashed line showing the time range for execution of a given non-critical activity,
PERT (PROJECT EVALUATION AND REVIEW
Earlier, we assumed deterministic estimates for time durations of various
activities in a project. But, in reality, activity durations may be probabilistic.
Hence, probabilistic considerations are incorporated while obtaining time
durations of the activities in a project.
The following three estimates are used:
a = optimistic time
b = pessimistic time
m = most likely time
The optimistic time is a time estimate if the execution is very good. The
pessimistic time is a time estimate if the execution is very badly done. The most
likely time is a time estimate if execution is normal. The probabilistic data for
project activities generally follow beta distribution. The formula for mean (µ)
and variance (  2) of the beta distribution are as follows:
µ = (a + 4 m + b)/6
  2 = [(b – a)/6]2
The range for the time estimates is from a to b. The most likely time will
be anywhere in between the range from a to b.
The expected project completion time =  µi
where µi is the expected duration of the ith critical activity.
The variance of the project completion time = i  i
where  i
2 is the variance of the ith critical activity in the critical path.
As a part of statistical analysis, we may be interested in knowing the
probability of completing the project on or before a given due date (C), or we
may be interested in knowing the expected project completion time if the
probability of completing the project is given.
For the purpose of this analysis, the Beta distribution is approximated to
standard normal distribution whose statistic is given by
z = (x – µ)/ where x is the actual project completion time.
µ = expected project completion time (sum of the expected durations of
the critical activities).
  = standard deviation of the expected project completion time (square
root of the sum of the variances of all the critical activities).
Therefore, P(x  C) represents the probability that the project will be completed
on or before the C time units. This can be converted into the standard normal
statistic z as follows:
P[(x – µ)/  ]  (C – µ)/  = P[z  (C – µ)/ ]
Consider the following (Table 14.5) summarizing the details
of a project involving nine activities.
Details of Project with Nine Activities
Duration (weeks)
a
m
b
D, E, F, G
The project comprises the following steps:
(a) Construct the project network.
(b) Find the expected duration and variance of each activity.
(c) Find the critical path and the expected project completion time.
(d) What is the probability of completing the project on or before
(e) If the probability of completing the project is 0.85, find the expected
project completion time.
(a) The project network is shown in Fig. 14.6.
Network for Example 14.4.
(b) The expected duration and variance of each activity are as shown in
Computations of Expected Duration and Variance
Expected
Variance
(c) The calculations of critical path based on expected durations are
summarized in Fig. 14.7.
Network for Example 14.4 with PERT calculations.
The critical path is C–G–D 1–H, and the corresponding project completion
time is 16 weeks.
(d) The sum of the variances of all the activities on the critical path is 2.89
weeks (1.78 + 1.00 + 0.00 + 0.11). Therefore,
P(x  19) = P[(x – µ)/   (19 – 16)/1.7]
= 0.9616 (value obtained from standard normal table).
Thus, the probability of completing the project on or before 19 weeks is 0.9616.
(e) P(x  C) = 0.85
P[(x – µ)/   (C – µ)/ ] = 0.85
P[z  (C – 16)/1.7] = 0.85
From the standard normal table, the value of z is 1.04 when the cumulative
probability is 0.85. Therefore,
C = 1.04  1.7 + 16 = 17.768 weeks
= 18 weeks (approx.)
The project will be completed in 17.768 weeks (approx. 18 weeks) if the
probability of completing the project is 0.85.
1. Explain different phases of project management.
2. Distinguish between CPM and PERT.
3. Discuss the guidelines for network construction.
4. The activities involved in Alpha Garment Manufacturing Company are given
in the following table, with their time estimates. Draw the network for the
given activities and carry out the critical path calculations.
Forecast sales volume
Study competitive market
Design item and facilities
Prepare production plan
Estimate cost of production
Set sales price
Prepare budget
5. Consider the following problem involving activities from A to J.
(c) Compute the total floats and free floats for non-critical activities.
6. Consider the following data of a project:
(c) Find the critical path and the expected project completion time.
(d) What is the probability of completing the project on or before
(e) If the probability of completing the project is 0.8, find the expected
Value analysis is one of the major techniques of cost reduction and cost
prevention. It is a disciplined approach that ensures necessary functions for
minimum cost without sacrificing quality, reliability, performance, and
appearance. According to the Society of American Value Engineers (SAVE),
Value Analysis is the systematic application of recognized techniques
which identify the function of a product or service, establish a monetary
value for the function and provide the necessary function reliably at the
lowest overall cost.
It is an organized approach to identify unnecessary costs associated with
any product, material part, component, system or service by analysing the
function and eliminating such costs without impairing the quality, functional
reliability, or the capacity of the product to give service.
WHEN TO APPLY VALUE ANALYSIS
One can definitely expect very good results by initiating a VA programme if one
or more of the following symptoms are present:
1. Company’s products show decline in sales.
2. Company’s prices are higher than those of its competitors.
3. Raw materials cost has grown disproportionate to the volume of production.
4. New designs are being introduced.
5. The cost of manufacture is rising disproportionate to the volume of
production.
6. Rate of return on investment has a falling trend.
7. Inability of the firm to meet its delivery commitments.
Value Analysis vs. Value Engineering
Often the terms value analysis and value engineering are used synonymously.
Value Analysis/Value Engineering
Though the philosophy underlying the two is same, i. e. identification of
unnecessary cost, yet they are different. The difference lies in the time and the
stage at which the techniques are applied.
Value analysis is the application of a set of techniques to an existing product
with a view to improve its value. It is thus a remedial process. Value engineering
is the application of exactly the same set of techniques to a new product at the
design stage, project concept or preliminary design when no hardware exists to
ensure that bad features are not added. Value engineering, therefore, is a
preventive process.
The term ‘value’ is used in different ways and, consequently, has different
meanings. The designer equates the value with reliability; a purchase person
with price paid for the item; a production person with what it costs to
manufacture, and a sales person with what the customer is willing to pay. Value,
in value investigation, refers to “economic value”, which itself can be divided
into four types: cost value, exchange value, use value, and esteem value. These
are now briefly described.
Cost value.
It is the summation of the labour, material, overhead and all
other elements of cost required to produce an item or provide a service
compared to a base.
Exchange value.
It is the measure of all the properties, qualities and
features of the product, which make the product possible of being traded for
another product or for money. In a conventional sense, exchange value refers to
the price that a purchaser will offer for the product, the price being dependent
upon satisfaction (value) which he derives from the product. Value derived from
the product consists of two parts “use value” and “esteem value”, which are now
described.
Use value.
It is known as the function value. The use value is equal to the
value of the functions performed. Therefore, it is the price paid by the buyer
(buyer’s view), or the cost incurred by the manufacturer (manufacturer’s view)
in order to ensure that the product performs its intended functions efficiently.
The use value is the fundamental form of economic value. An item without
“use value” can have neither “exchange value” nor “esteem value”.
Esteem value.
It involves the qualities and appearance of a product (like
a TV set), which attract persons and create in them a desire to possess the
product. Therefore, esteem value is the price paid by the buyer or the cost
incurred by the manufacturer beyond the use value.
Performance
The performance of a product is the measure of functional features and
properties that make it suitable for a specific purpose. Appropriate performance
requires that (a) the product reliably accomplish the intended use of work or
service requirement (functional requirements), (b) the product provide
protection against accident, harmful effects on body and danger to human life
(safety requirements), (c) the product give trouble-free service cover during its
specified life span (reliability requirements), (d) service and maintenance work
can be carried out on the product with ease and with simple tools
(maintainability requirements), and (e) appearance of the product creates an
impression on the buyer and induces in him or her the desire to own the product
(appearance requirements).
Performance and cost must be interwoven. Desired performance at the least
cost should be achieved by selecting appropriate materials and manufacturing
operations, which is the measure of value. Therefore, the value of the product
is the ratio of performance (utility) to cost. Thus,
Value = Performance (utility)
Value can be increased by increasing the utility for the same cost or by
decreasing the cost for the same utility. Satisfactory performance at lesser cost
through identification and development of low cost alternatives is the
philosophy of Value analysis.
Function is the purpose for which the product is made. Identification of the basic
functions and determination of the cost currently being spent on them are the
two major considerations of value analysis.
Function identifies the characteristics which make the product/component/
part/item/device to work or sell. “Work functions” lend performance value while
“sell functions” provide esteem value. Verbs like “support”, “hold”, “transmit”,
“prevent”, “protect”, “exhibits”, “control”, etc., are used to describe work
functions, while “attract”, enhance”, “improve”, “create”, etc., are used to
describe “sell” functions. For example, in a “bus driver cabin”, the functional
analysis of some of the parts are given in Table 15.1.
Functional Analysis of Some Parts of a Bus Driver Cabin
Component of study
Functional analysis
Verb
Noun
Steering wheel
Control
Direction
Gear box
Change
Speed
Brake system
Stop
Vehicle
Wiper
Clear
Water
Horn
Sound
Side mirror
Show
Side traffic
Classification of the functions
Rarely do all functions assume equal importance. Usually, some functions are
more important than others. Functions can be classified into the following three
categories:
Primary functions are the basic functions for which the product is specially
designed to achieve. Primary functions, therefore, are the most essential
functions whose non-performance would make the product worthless, e. g. a
photo frame exhibits photographs, a chair supports weight, a fluorescent tube
gives light.
Secondary functions are those which, if not in-built, would not prevent the
device from performing its primary functions, e. g., arms of a chair provide
support for hands. Secondary functions are usually related to convenience. The
product can still work and fulfill its intended objective even if these functions
are not in-built and yet they may be necessary to sell the product.
Tertiary functions are usually related to esteem appearance. For example,
Sunmica top of a table gives esteem appearance for the table.
Let us consider a single example of painting a company bus to explain all
the above three functions. Here, the primary function of painting is to avoid
corrosion. The secondary function is to identify the company to which the bus
belongs by the colour of the paint (e. g. blue colour for Ashok Leyland Ltd.). The
tertiary function is to impart a very good appearance to the bus by using brilliant
colours.
The aims of value engineering are as follows:
1. Simplify the product.
2. Use (new) cheaper and better materials.
3. Modify and improve product design.
4. Use efficient processes.
5. Reduce the product cost.
6. Increase the utility of the product by economical means.
7. Save money or increase the profits.
The value content of each piece of a product is assessed using the following
questions:
1. Does its use contribute to value?
2. Is its cost proportionate to its usefulness?
3. Does it need all its features?
These three questions pertain to the function of the part which may decide
the elimination of parts.
 Is there anything better for the intended use?
 Can company or vendor standard be used?
 Can a usable part be made by a lower-cost method?
 Is it made with the proper tooling, considering volume?
 Does the part yield suitable profit?
 Can another vendor furnish the same at a lower cost?
The basic steps of value engineering are as follows:
(a) Blast
(i) Identify the product.
(ii) Collect relevant information.
(iii) Define different functions.
(b) Create
(iv) Different alternatives.
(v) Critically evaluate the alternatives.
(c) Refine
(vi) Develop the best alternative.
(vii) Implement the alternative.
Step 1: Identify the product.
First, identify the component for study. In
future, any design change should add value and it should not make the product
as obsolete one. Value engineering can be applied to a product as a whole or to
sub-units.
Step 2: Collect relevant information.
Information relevant to the
following must be collected:
 Technical specifications with drawings
 Production processes, machine layout and instruction sheet
 Time study details and manufacturing capacity
 Complete cost data and marketing details
 Latest development in related products
Step 3: Define different functions.
Identify and define the primary,
secondary and tertiary functions of the product or parts of interest. Also, specify
the value content of each function and identify the high cost areas.
Step 4: Different alternatives.
Knowing the functions of each component
part and its manufacturing details, generate the ideas and create different
alternatives so as to increase the value of the product. Value engineering should
be done after a brain storming session. All feasible or non-feasible suggestions
are recorded without any criticism; rather, persons are encouraged to express
their views freely.
Basic principles of brain storming
Some of the important principles of brain storming which are useful in value
analysis are now listed.
(i) A quality idea comes from quantity of ideas.
If the number of ideas
generated is more, the more good solutions do turn up.
(ii) Creative ideas emerge from unconventional thinking.
This is possible
when members of the group “talk off the top of their heads” and voice weird
ideas as they flash through their minds, regardless of how stupid or impractical
they may appear. Often, non-technical personnel can prove to be the greatest
innovators in technical areas since their viewpoints are objective and they do not
know that some of their ideas are technically not feasible at all. So it is
preferable to include one or two non-technical persons in the study team.
Members are to be told by the team leader in the beginning of the session itself,
not to breathe a word of criticism of even the most weirdest idea.
(iii) Spontaneous evaluation of ideas curbs imaginative thinking and retards
the flow of creative ideas.
The group should not evaluate the alternatives
suggested by its member immediately since immediate evaluation may curb
imaginative thinking and slow down the flow of creative ideas.
(iv) Hitch-hiking on the ideas often lead to better ideas.
Participants have
to improve upon ideas of other members either directly or by combining more
ideas in addition to contributing ideas of their own. A brilliant idea may not be
a practical one initially, or it may look to be silly or useless but discussions can
convert it into a valuable one.
(v) Creativity is a regenerative process and the recording of ideas as they
emerge helps serve as a catalyst to generate more ideas.
Memory may not
retain all ideas or recall them when they are needed. So, a stenographer may be
asked to record ideas simultaneously. A tape recorder can also be used for this
purpose or even ideas can be written on a blackboard. These recorded ideas can
be reviewed at some later date.
(vi) When ideas cease to flow, short diversions enable the mind to rebound
with new ideas after recuperation.
Members of the syndicate may reach a
stage where new ideas do not come. At such a stage, short diversions—rest,
favourite sport, hobby, lunch or tea break, etc.—may be taken during which
members are advised to sleep over the ideas and report fresh after the break.
Such short diversions enable mind to recoup and rebound with new ideas.
Step 5: Critically evaluate the alternatives.
Different ideas recorded under
step 4 are compared, evaluated and critically assessed for their virtues, validity
and feasibility as regards their financial and technical requirements. The ideas
technically found and involving lower costs are further developed.
Step 6: Develop the best alternative.
Detailed development plans are made
for those ideas which emerged during step 5 and appear most suitable and
promising. Development plans comprise drawing the sketches, building of
models, conducting discussions with the purchase section, finance section,
marketing division, etc.
Step 7: Implement the alternative.
The best alternative is converted into a
proto-type manufacturing model which ultimately goes into operation and its
results are recorded.
ADVANTAGES AND APPLICATION AREAS
Advantages
The advantages of value engineering are as follows:
1. It is a much faster cost reduction technique.
2. It is a less expensive technique.
3. It reduces production costs and adds value to sales income of the product.
Applications
The various application areas of value engineering are machine tool industries,
industries making accessories for machine tools, auto industries, import
substitutes, etc.
1. Define value analysis(VA)/ value engineering (VE).
2. Discuss the symptoms favouring the applications of VA/VE.
3. Define value. What are the types of value?
4. What are the types of functions? Explain them with examples.
5. What are the aims of value engineering?
6. Briefly explain the steps of value engineering.
7. Discuss the advantages and application areas of value engineering.
A generalized format of the linear programming (LP) problem is
Maximize Z = C 1 X 1 + C 2 X 2 + C 3 X 3 +... + Cn Xn
subject to
a 11 X 1 + a 12 X 2 +... + a 1 n Xn  b 1
a 21 X 1 + a 22 X 2 +... + a 2 n Xn  b 2
ai 1 X 1 + ai 2 X 2 +... +
ain Xn  bi
am 1 X 1 + am 2 X 2 +... + amn Xn  bm
where, X 1, X 2, X 3,..., Xn  0.
If the number of variables in the problem is two, then one can use the
graphical method to solve the problem. If the number of variables in the problem
is more than two, one should use the simplex method to solve the problem.
DEVELOPMENT OF LP MODELS
Modelling is an art. One can develop this expertise only by seeing more and
more models. In this section, the concept of model building is demonstrated
using two example problems.
A company manufactures two types of products, P 1 and P 2.
Each product uses a lathe and milling machine. The processing time for P 1 on
the lathe is five hours and on the milling machine it is four hours. The
processing time for P 2 on the lathe is 10 hours and on the milling machine it
is four hours. The maximum number of hours per week available on the lathe
and the milling machine are 60 hours and 40 hours, respectively. The profit per
unit of selling P 1 and P 2 are Rs. 6.00 and Rs. 8.00, respectively. Formulate a
linear programming model to determine the production volume of each product
such that the total profit is maximized.
The data of the problem are summarized in Table 16.1.
Details of Products
Product
Limit on
machine hours
Lathe
Milling machine
Profit/unit (Rs.)
Let X 1 be the production volume of the product, P 1, and
X 2 be the production volume of the product, P 2.
The corresponding linear programming model to determine the production
volume of each product such that the total profit is maximized is as shown
below:
Maximize Z = 6 X 1 + 8 X 2
5 X 1 + 10 X 2  60
4 X 1 + 4 X 2  40
X 1, X 2  0
A nutrition scheme for babies is proposed by a committee of
doctors. Babies can be given two types of food (Type I and Type II), which are
available in standard packets weighing 50 grams. The cost per packet of these
foods is Rs. 2.00 and Rs. 3.00 respectively. The vitamin availability in each type
of food per packet and the minimum vitamin requirement in each type of
vitamin is summarized in Table 16.2. Develop a linear programming model to
determine the optimal combination of food types with the minimum cost such
that the minimum required vitamin in each type is satisfied.
Details of Food Types
Vitamin availability per packet
Minimum daily
Vitamin
required vitamin
Cost/packet (Rs.)
Let, X 1 be the No. of packets of food type 1 suggested for babies,
and X 2 be the No. of packets of food type 2 suggested for babies.
A linear programming model to determine the number of packets of each
food type to be suggested for babies with the minimum cost such that the
minimum daily required vitamin in each food type is satisfied is as shown
below.
Linear Programming
Minimize Z = 2 X 1 + 3 X 2
X 1 + X 2  6
7 X 1 + X 2  14
As already stated, if the number of variables in any linear programming problem
is two, one can use the graphical methods to solve it. In this section, the same
is demonstrated with two example problems.
Solve the following LP problem using the graphical method.
Given the following LP model:
The introduction of the non-negative constraints X 1  0 and X 2  0 will
eliminate the second, third and fourth quadrants of the XY plane as shown in
Compute the coordinates to plot equations relating to the constraints on the
XY plane as shown below.
Consider the first constraint in the form
5 X 1 + 10 X 2 = 60
When X 1 = 0,
When X 2 = 0,
Now, plot constraint 1 as shown in the Fig. 16.1.
Consider the second constraint in the form
4 X 1 + 4 X 2 = 40
Now, plot constraint 2 as shown in Fig. 16.1.
The closed polygon A–B–C–D is the feasible region.
The objective function value at each of the corner points of the closed polygon
is computed as follows by substituting its coordinates in the objective function:
Z(A) = 6  0 + 8  0 = 0
Z(B) = 6  10 + 8  0 = 60
Z(C) = 6  8 + 8  2 = 48 + 16 = 64
Z(D) = 6  0 + 8  6 = 48
Since the type of the objective function is maximization, the solution
corresponding to the maximum Z value should be selected as the optimum
solution. The Z value is maximum for the corner point C. Hence, the
corresponding solution is
Z (optimum) = 64
4 1 + 4 2 40
5 1 + 10 2 60
Graphical plot of Example 16.3.
Solve the following LP problem using the graphical method:
Consider the following LP problem:
The introduction of the non-negative constraints X 1  0 and X 2  0 will
eliminate the second, third and fourth quadrants of the XY-plane as shown in
Graphical plot of Example 16.4.
Compute the coordinates to plot the equations relating to the constraints on
the XY-plane as shown below.
X 1 + X 2 = 6
When X 1 = 0, X 2 = 6
When X 2 = 0, X 1 = 6
1 + 2 6
1 + 2 14
Now, plot constraint 1 as shown in Fig. 16.2.
7 X 1 + X 2 = 14
Now, plot constraint 2 as shown in Fig. 16.2.
The optimum solution will be in any one of the corners A, B and C.
The objective function value at each of these corner points of the feasible
solution space is computed as follows by substituting its coordinates in the
objective function:
Z(A) = 2  0 + 3  14 = 42
Z(B) = 2(4/3) + 3(14/3) = 50/3 = 16.67
Z(C) = 2  6 + 3  0 = 12
Since the type of the objective function is minimization, the solution
corresponding to the minimum Z-value is to be selected as the optimum
solution. The Z-value is minimum for the corner point C. Accordingly, the
corresponding solution is presented as
X 2* = 0, Z (optimum) = 12.
This method is demonstrated using a numerical problem which is given below.
Consider the linear programming model of Example 16.1 as
shown below and solve it by the simplex method.
The general form of the linear programming problem is
The canonical form of the above LP problem is
Maximize Z = 6 X 1 + 8 X 2 + 0 S 1 + 0 S 2
5 X 1 + 10 X 2 + S 1 = 60
4 X 1 + 4 X 2 + S 2 = 40
X 1, X 2, S 1, S 2  0
(S 1, S 2 are slack variables).
The initial Simplex table of the above problem is shown in Table 16.3.
Initial Simplex Table
CBi
Basic
variable
Zj
Cj – Zj
* Key column,
** Key row.
The value at the intersection of the key row and the key column is called
the key element.
Zj =
∑CBi * Tij
where Tij is the technological coefficient for the ith row and the jth column
of the table.
Cj – Zj is the relative contribution. Here, Cj is the objective coefficient for
the jth variable. The objective function value of the problem at this iteration is
zero, i. e. the value of Zj against the solution column is the value of the objective
function.
Optimality condition
For maximization problem, if all Cj – Zj   0, then optimality is reached.
Otherwise, select the entering variable with the maximum Cj – Zj value.
[For minimization problem, if all Cj – Zj are greater than or equal to zero,
the optimality is reached; otherwise, select the entering variable with the most
negative value.]
In Table 16.3, all the values for Cj – Zj are not less than or equal to zero.
Hence, the solution can be improved further. Cj – Zj is maximum for the variable
X 2. Therefore, X 2 enters the basis. This is known as the entering variable, and
the corresponding column is called the key column.
Feasibility condition
To maintain the feasibility of the solution in each iteration, do the following:
1. Find the ratio between the solution value and the respective value in the key
column value in each row.
2. Then, select the variable from the present set of basic variables w. r. t. the
minimum ratio (break tie randomly). This is the leaving variable and the
corresponding row is called the key row. The value at the intersection of the
key row and key column is called the key element or pivot element.
In Table 16.3, the leaving variable is S 1 and row 1 is the key row. The key
The next iteration is shown in Table 16.4. In this table, the basic variable
S 1 of Table 16.3 is replaced by X 2.
New value = Old value – Key column value key row value
Key value
Sample calculation.
New value for row 2 and column X 1
New value = 4 – 4
= 4 – 20
= 4 – 2 = 2
The solution in Table 16.4 is not optimal. Hence, the variable X 1 is selected
as the entering variable and after computing the ratios, S 2 is selected as the
leaving variable. The next iteration is shown in Table 16.5.
In Table 16.5, all the values for Cj – Zj are 0 and negative. Therefore, the
optimality is reached.
The corresponding optimal solution is
X 1 (production volume of P 1) = 8 units
X 2 (production volume of P 2) = 2 units
Optimal objective value Z (total profit) = Rs. 64.00.
Consider the linear programming model (shown below) of
Example 16.2, and solve it by using the simplex method.
The general form of the linear programming problem is as follows:
Standard form.
The standard form of the above model is as follows:
X 1 + X 2 – S 1 = 6
7 X 1 + X 2 – S 2 = 14
X 1, X 2, S 1 and S 2  0
S 1 and S 2 are called surplus variables which are introduced to balance the
constraints.
Canonical form.
The canonical form of the above model is
Minimize Z = 2 X 1 + 3 X 2 + M 1  R 1 + M 2  R 2
X 1 + X 2 – S 1 + R 1 = 6
7 X 1 + X 2 – S 2 + R 2 = 14
X 1, X 2, S 1, S 2; R 1 and R 2  0
Here, R 1 and R 2 are called artificial variables which are introduced to have
basic variables in each of the constraints. These artificial variables are included
in the model for its solution. So, in the final solution, these variables should not
be available. This is achieved by including these variables in the objective
function with a very high positive coefficient, M, since the objective function is
minimization type (a very high negative coefficient, M for maximization
objective type). Even, a small value of R 1 or R 2 will increase the value of the
objective function infinitely which is against the objective of minimization. So,
the solution procedure should necessarily assign zero value to each of the
artificial variables in the final solution.
The initial table of the model is shown in Table 16.6.
Initial Table
Sol.
2 – 8 M* 3 – 2 M
**Key row.
Optimality condition.
For the minimization problem, if all Cj – Zj are greater
than or equal to zero, optimality is reached; otherwise, select the entering
variable with the most negative value.
In Table 16.6, all the values for Cj – Zj are not greater than or equal to zero.
Hence, the solution can be improved further. Cj – Zj has maximum negative
value for the variable X 1. So, X 1 enters the basis. This is known as the entering
variable, and the corresponding column is called the key column. If Cj – Zj is
a function of M, then ignore the constant numeric terms in it while making
comparison with another Cj – Zj. The feasibility condition is same as that for the
maximization problem. The ratio is minimum for R 2. Therefore, it is called the
key row and it leaves the basis. The modified table after applying the pivot
operation is shown in Table 16.7.
7 M + 2
7 M – 2
*Key column,
In Table 16.7, the column X 2 becomes the key column and the row R 1
becomes the key row. So, R 1 is replaced by X 2 in the following (Table 16.8)
with corresponding pivot operations.
In Table 16.8, column S 2 becomes the key column and the row X 2 becomes
the key row. So, X 2 is replaced by S 2 as shown in Table 16.9 with the
corresponding pivot operations.
Since all the Cj – Zj are equal to 0 and above, optimality is reached.
The corresponding optimal solutions are
Interpretation of the results:
X 1 (No. of packets of type 1 food) = 6
X 2 (No. of packets of type 2 food) = 0
Corresponding daily total cost of food = Rs. 12.00
Thus, the babies are to be given six packets of type 1 food daily.
1. A manufacturer of leather belts makes three types of belts A,B and C which
are processed on three machines M 1, M 2 and M 3. Belt A requires two hours
on machine M 1 and three hours on machine M 2. Belt B requires three hours
on machine M 1, two hours on machine M 2 and two hours on machine M 3,
and belt C requires five hours on machine M 2, and four hours on machine
M 3. There are 80 hours of time per week available on machine M 1, 100
hours of time available on machine M 2, and 150 hours of time on machine
M 3. The profit gained from belt A is Rs. 5.00 per unit, from belt B is
Rs. 7.00 per unit, and from belt C is Rs. 6.00 per unit. What should be the
weekly production of each type of belts so that the profit is maximum?
2. Solve the following linear programming problem:
Maximize Z = X 1 + 2 X 2 + 3 X 3 + X 4
X 1 + 2 X 2 + 3 X 3  15
2 X 1 + X 2 + 5 X 3  20
X 1 + 2 X 2 + X 3 + X 4  10
X 1, X 2, X 3, X 4  0.
3. Consider the following linear programming problem:
(a) Solve it graphically.
(b) Solve it using the simplex method.
Maximize Z = 8 X 1 + 18 X 2
10 X 1 + 24 X 2  120
15 X 1 + 25 X 2  140
20 X 1 + 80 X 2  200
X 1, X 2  0.
4. Consider the following linear programming problem:
Minimize Z = 20 X 1 + 8 X 2
15 X 1 + 25 X 2  180
10 X 1 + 15 X 2  160
12 X 1 + 16 X 2  120
Budnick, F. S., Mcleavey, D. and Mojena, R., Principles of Operations Research
for Management, 2 nd ed., Richard D. Irwin, Illinois, 1988.
Degarmo, E. P., Sullivan, W. G. and Canada, J. R., Engineering Economy, 7 th ed.,
Macmillan, New York, 1984.
Grant, E. L., Ireson, W. G. and Leavenworth, R. S., Principles of Engineering
Economy, Ronald Press, New York, 1976.
Markland, R. E., Topics in Management Science, Wiley, New York, 1989.
Monks, J., Operations Management, Mc Graw-Hill, New York, 1987.
Panneerselvam, R., Inflation Adjusted Investment Decision, Indian Economic
Panorama, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 13–14, 1992.
Panneerselvam, R., Evaluation of Public Activities, Indian Economic Panorama,
Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 21–22, 1992.
Panneerselvam, R., Advanced Techniques for Productivity Improvement,
Proceedings of the Second Tamil Science Congress, pp. 80–83, Nov. 1993,
Madras.
Panneerselvam, R., Strategies for Productivity Improvement, Pondicherry
Catalyst, Vol. 1, No.1, pp. 51–60, 1997.
Panneerselvam, R., Inflation Adjusted Economic Life of Machine, Industrial
Engineering Journal, Vol. XXVI, No. 9, pp. 16–19, 1997.
Panneerselvam, R., Production and Operations Management, Prentice-Hall of
India, New Delhi, 1999.
Rajkumar, G. and Panneerselvam, R., Quantitative Tools for Public Systems
Design and Operations, Indian Economic Panorama, Vol. 2, No. 3,
Smith, G. W., Engineering Economy, Iowa State Press, Iowa, 1973.
Sundaram, T. S and Panneerselvam, R., Selection and Evaluation of Rural Road
Project in Hills, Industrial Engineering Journal, Vol. XX, No. 12, pp. 8–15,
Taha, H. A., Operations Research—An introduction, 6 th ed., Prentice-Hall of
India, New Delhi, 1997.
Thuesen, H. G., Fabrycky, W. J. and Thuesen, G. J., Engineering Economy,
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1981.
Interest Table for Annual Compounding with i = 0.25%
Interest Table for Annual Compounding with i = 0.25% (Cont.)
Appendix—Interest Tables
Interest Table for Annual Compounding with i = 0.5%
Interest Table for Annual Compounding with i = 0.5% (Cont.)
Interest Table for Annual Compounding with i = 0.75%
Interest Table for Annual Compounding with i = 0.75% (Cont.)
Interest Table for Annual Compounding with i = 1%
Interest Table for Annual Compounding with i = 1% (Cont.)
Interest Table for Annual Compounding with i = 1.25%
Interest Table for Annual Compounding with i = 1.25% (Cont.)
Interest Table for Annual Compounding with i = 1.5%
Interest Table for Annual Compounding with i = 1.5% (Cont.)
Interest Table for Annual Compounding with i = 1.75%
Interest Table for Annual Compounding with i = 1.75% (Cont.)
Activities on Arrows Diagram (AOA
Activities on Nodes Diagram (AON
Annual equivalent method, 68–85
Basic inventory decisions, 158
Brainstorming, basic principles of, 197
Building material selection, 21–22
Canonical form of LP, 205
Capital recovery with return, 108–109
Comparative use value, 117, 118
Comparison of alternatives, bases of,
Cost trade-off in inventory control, 158
Costs, elements of, 7
Critical path method, 181
Defender, concept of, 109
Demand, factors influencing, 2–3
Depreciation, methods of, 126–33
declining balance method, 128–30
double-declining balance method, 128
service output method, 134
sinking fund method, 131–33
straight line method, 126–28
sums of the years digits method, 130–31
Design selection for a product, 18–21
Direct material cost, 7
Earliest start schedule, 186
Earliest start time, 182
Economic Order Quantity (EOQ), 158
Economic life, 103, 150
determination with inflationary effect,
Economics, definition of, 1
Economy, flow in, 1–2
Effective interest rate, 37–38
Efficiency, types of, 4, 5
Elements of costs (see costs), 7
Equal-payment series capital recovery
Equal-payment series compound amount,
Equal-payment
series
Equal-payment series sinking fund, 31–32
Evaluation of public alternatives, 137–38
Index
Future worth method, 55–65
Gantt charts/time charts, 185
Group replacement policy (see also
Individual replacement policy, (see also
adjusted economic life of machine, 149
procedure to adjust, 147
Latest completion time, 182
Latest start schedule, 186
Law of supply and demand, 2–3
canonical form of, 205
general form of, 204
Linear programming problem (LPP)
optimality condition in maximization
optimality condition in minimization
Make or buy
simple cost analysis, 169
Make or buy decision, 168
criteria for, 168, 169
Margin of safety, 10
Material selection for a product, 16–18
Most likely time, 187
Network construction
rules for, 180, 181
Present worth function graph, 89
Present worth method of comparison,
Process planning/Process modification,
Project Evaluation and Review Technique
Rate of return, 88
Rate of return method, 88–89
Replacement
of existing asset, 108
limitations of existing model of, 150–51
Replacement policy, individual, 118
Replacement problem, types of, 101
Simple economic analysis, 16–24
Single-payment
present worth amount, 29–30
Straight line method of depreciation, 126–28
Substitution of raw materials, 16 –18
Supply, factors influencing, 3–4
Time value of money, 26–28
Uniform gradient series annual equivalent
Value analysis, 192, 193
Value engineering
Designed as a text book for undergraduate students in various engineering
disciplines — mechanical, civil and industrial engineering — and for postgraduate
students in industrial engineering and water resource management, this
comprehensive and well-organized book shows how complex economic
decisions can be made from a number of given alternatives. It provides the
managers not only a sound basis but also a clear-cut approach to decision
making. These decisions will ultimately result in minimizing costs and/or
maximizing benefits to their organizations. What is more, the book adequately
illustrates these approaches with numerical problems and Indian cases.
After giving an overview of the subject, the text discusses, in a simple and easyto-read style, such topics as interest formulas and their applications, methods
like present worth method of comparison, future worth method, annual equivalent
method, rate of return method, and evaluation of public alternatives. Besides,
it deals with depreciation, inflation adjusted decisions, and inventory control.
Finally, the book analyzes other important areas, for instance, make or buy decision,
project management, value analysis/value engineering, and linear programming.
A distinguishing feature of the book is that it has an Appendix on interest tables
for a wide range of interest rates (0.25% – 50%) and for a period ranging from one
year to 100 years. This book, which is profusely illustrated with worked-out
examples and diagrams, should prove extremely useful not only as a text book
but also as a reference for those offering courses in such management areas
as project management, production management and financial management.
R. PANNEERSELVAM, Ph. D., is Professor, School of Management, Pondicherry
University. Earlier, he taught at Anna University, Madras, for several years. A
member of the Indian Institution of Industrial Engineering and a Senior member
of Computer Society of India, Professor Panneerselvam has contributed to such
prestigious journals as International Journal of Production Research,
International Journal of Production Economics, International Journal of
Management and Systems, and Industrial Engineering Journal. His research
interests are in areas like group technology, single machine sequencing, assembly
line balancing, investment decisions, and network-based optimization techniques.
www. phindia. com
9 7 8 8 1 2 0
3 1 7 4 3 7